The number of cancer survivors is growing rapidly, and over 70% are overweight or have obesity. Given the increased risk for obesity-related conditions (e.g., cardiovascular disease, second malignancies) weight loss interventions are a priority in this patient population, yet few have access. The number of American cancer survivors is approaching 20 million,1 a growing population at high risk for cardiovascular disease, diabetes, functional decline, and second malignancies.2 Overweight and obesity affect >70% of cancer survivors,3 placing them at even greater risk for these health-related conditions.4 Obesity also is associated with cancer recurrence and mortality, making weight management a priority.5,6 Weight management, however, is complicated for cancer survivors. The Practice Guidelines for Adult Overweight and Obesity Management,7 deem cancer survivors “a special population” with unique needs (e.g., sarcopenia and suboptimal diets), that require professionally-tailored regimens. Dietitian-delivered interventions have proven efficacy for weight loss and improving cardiometabolic outcomes.7,8 However, the needs of most cancer survivors go unanswered because of shortages of oncologic-focused dietitians.9,10 Telephone counseling and tailored print interventions have shown efficacy in promoting weight loss and improved diet quality among cancer survivors, with outcomes rivalling in-person delivery.11 However, substantial costs limit scalability. Web-based programs, especially those adapted from efficacy-proven interventions, and which address the complex needs of cancer survivors (e.g., food intolerances, nutrient-drug interactions) represent the new frontier. Herein we report the results of the AiM, PLan, and act on LIFestYles (AMPLIFY)-diet intervention which was adapted for web-based delivery from the efficacy-proven Reach-out to ENhancE Wellness (RENEW) intervention.12,13 Like RENEW, AMPLIFY was tested in a nationwide randomized controlled trial (RCT) among a broad sample of cancer survivors.14 We conducted a 2-arm, single-blinded, randomized controlled trial to test whether a 24-week, fully-automated, web-based diet intervention significantly improves body weight status and other health-related outcomes compared to a waitlist control among cancer survivors. The AiM, PLan, and act on LIFestYles (AMPLIFY)-diet intervention offered serialized, tailored guidance to achieve a 0.5 kg/week weight loss and improve diet quality. Survivors of one-of-nine obesity-related cancers with >70% 5-year survival, age 50+, with body mass indexes of 25-<50 kg/m2 enrolled across the United States (n=349). Participants were randomly assigned to the AMPLIFY-diet intervention (n=151) versus waitlist control (n=198). The primary outcome was weight loss; secondary outcomes included other health indices and diet quality. Intervention delivery and assessments (baseline, 3- and 6-months) occurred from 2020–2024. Intent-to-treat analyses showed significantly greater weight loss among intervention versus waitlist participants: % weight change: −4.75% (95% Confidence Interval [95%CI] −6.04, −3.46), with higher proportions attaining 3%, 5% and 10% weight loss benchmarks (p-values<0.001). Significant between-arm differences also were observed for waist circumference (−3.47 cm [95%CI:−4.86,−2.08];p<0.001), circulating leptin (−2050.5 pg/mL [95% CI:−3049.5,−1051.6]; p<0.001), cognitive function (2.22 [95%CI:0.30, 4.15];p=0.02), and systolic blood pressure (Intention-to-Treat:−3.54 mmHg [95%CI:−7.30,0.27];p=0.07/ sensitivity analysis: −5.10 mmHg [95%CI:−9.09,−1.10];p=0.013). Furthermore, significant decreases in caloric intake (−288 kcal/day [95%CI:−391.5,−184.6];p<0.001) and improvements in diet quality were observed. This trial randomized 349 cancer survivors across 31-of-the-48 contiguous, continental United States (Figure 1), despite COVID-associated delays. Participant ages spanned 50–82 years (mean=63.3 years)(Table 1). While most had diagnoses of breast cancer, there also was strong representation of urogenital cancers. Roughly half of participants were 2–5 years post-diagnosis and had received adjuvant radiotherapy with slightly fewer receiving chemotherapy and one-third receiving hormonal therapy (with one-fourth reporting current use). Two-thirds of participants had BMIs ≥30 kg/m2 (indicating obesity); the average number of co-morbidities exceeded three with most participants reporting cardiovascular disease. Roughly one-quarter of survivors identified as male, racial-ethnic minority, rural, or resided in areas of high deprivation. Most had education beyond high school, internet access through multiple channels, annual household incomes >$50k, and health insurance; approximately half were currently employed. Randomization effectively distributed characteristics between study arms. Figure 2 illustrates enrollment and post-randomization events. Three participants were excluded shortly after randomization due to cancer recurrence or weight loss precluding eligibility; thus, the intent-to-treat analysis included data from 196 waitlisted participants and 150 in the AMPLIFY-diet intervention (secondary sensitivity analyses were performed on 164 waitlisted and 121 intervention participants). Intervention arm participants completed on average 60.3% of 24 sessions (standard deviation[SD]:34.8), with only one failing to initiate the program. Moreover, 68% reported sharing AMPLIFY content with their family and friends (though <10% participated in the private Facebook™ group). Drop-out was similar between arms (18.7% versus 16.3% among the intervention and waitlisted arms, respectively); no differences were noted between participants who completed the RCT versus those who dropped-out. There also were no between-arm differences in reported health events, hospitalizations, emergency room or doctor’s visits, falls, or out-of-pocket medical costs over the study period (data not shown). Table 2 displays changes in body weight, other measures of adiposity, and diet-related outcomes. The intervention arm experienced significant improvements over time across most outcomes, including the primary outcome of ≥3% weight loss (as well as 5- and 10% weight loss), absolute weight loss, WC (total sample and among men and women separately), circulating adipokines, diet quality, sugar-sweetened beverage consumption, and behavioral constructs. No evidence of improvement was observed in the waitlist control. In most cases, these results translated into significant between-arm differences, except for adiponectin, and diet quality, though sensitivity analyses showed significant differences in diet quality (3.27 [0.23, 6.31];p=0.035 (Supplemental Table 1). No differences were noted for alcohol consumption. Figure 3 displays radar plots of baseline and 6-month Healthy Eating Index-2020 diet quality data for both arms.20 These plots showcase the seven within-arm improvements in diet quality detected in the AMPLIFY-diet intervention arm (including total score), and the one significant improvement in whole fruit consumption in the waitlist arm. Additionally, targeted behavioral mediators of the SCT-based intervention (social support, overcoming barriers and self-efficacy) showed significant improvements over time within the intervention arm. These results also translated into significant between-arm differences in social support and barriers interference, and borderline differences in self-efficacy (Table 2). Table 3 provides data on additional health-related outcomes. The intervention arm experienced significant improvements in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure, fasting glucose, the 30-second chair stand, and patient-reported outcomes of physical health, depression, social roles/abilities, and cognitive function, whereas none were observed within the waitlist. However, between-arm differences were only observed for social roles/abilities and cognitive function. No between-arm differences were noted in overall quality-of-life as measured by the EQ-5D. The results of sensitivity analyses also indicated that there were significant between-arm differences in systolic blood pressure (−5.10; 95%CI:−9.09,−1.10;p=0.013). Significant increases in cholesterol were detected by intent-to-treat analyses, despite subsequent adjustment for lipid-lowering agents. However, differences diminished to non-significance upon sensitivity analyses (Supplemental Table 1). The magnitude of weight loss achieved with AMPLIFY is the highest reported to date of any fully-automated intervention and resulted in significant benefits. Continued optimization and research to incorporate AMPLIFY-diet into broader use and clinical practice is warranted. Detailed methods of the Adapting Multiple Behavior Interventions that Effectively Improve Cancer Survivor Health Program Project, including the AMPLIFY-Diet RCT as one-of-three integrated RCTs, were published previously.14 The AMPLIFY-Diet RCT was a 2-arm, single-blinded trial that tested the hypothesis that a higher proportion of cancer survivors assigned to AMPLIFY-Diet versus a waitlist control would experience clinically-significant weight loss. Between-arm differences in secondary outcomes (waist circumference [WC], diet quality, cardiometabolic markers, physical functioning) also were compared. The RCT was approved by the University of Alabama at Birmingham (single IRB:300002068), registered (ClinicalTrials.gov:NCT04000880) and conducted from March 2020 to March 2024. Survivors of one-of-nine obesity-related cancers having a 5-year survival >70% (early-stage multiple myeloma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma, localized renal and ovarian cancer, and loco-regional colorectal, prostate, endometrial, thyroid, and female breast cancer) were recruited across the contiguous continental United States through partnerships with five cancer registries, word-of-mouth, and an online presence. Cancer type and stage was verified by cancer registries, health systems, or private oncologists. Other inclusion criteria were: 1) current age ≥50 years; 2) Body Mass Index (BMI):25-<50 kg/m2; 3) English-speaking/writing; 4) ≥8th grade education; and 5) willingness and ability to receive email and participate in web-based instruction and assessment (four participants were provided with hotspots to meet this criterion). Exclusion criteria were: 1) enrollment in another diet, weight loss, or exercise program; 2) assisted/skilled nursing resident; or 3) unwillingness or inability to fully participate in the unsupervised, web-based intervention or remote assessment (e.g., severe hearing or vision loss; walker, wheelchair or oxygen-use; recent myocardial infarction). Eligible survivors were emailed or mailed study documents, which were reviewed with study staff via telephone; signed informed consent was obtained via mailed or electronic forms (AdobeSign®, San Jose, CA). Change in body weight was the primary outcome. Given the co-occurrence of trial initiation and COVID-19, physical assessments were adapted to remote means and tested for reliability and validity, demonstrating excellent concordance for weight, WC, the 30-second chair stand, timed up-and-go, and 2-minute step tests.15,16 Remote assessments were conducted by trained staff via Zoom®(San Jose, CA) who were blinded to arm assignment. Assessors guided blood pressure measurements using an automated sphygmomanometer (Omron3, Lake Forest, IL) and the collection of fasting dried blood spots (DBS) to assess cardiometabolic markers. Assessors also administered the Older Americans Resources and Services comorbidity survey.17 Supplies and instructions were mailed/emailed 2-weeks prior to assessments. DBS were frozen until assayed using methods published previously.18 Telephone-administered dietary recalls of a non-consecutive weekday and weekend day were performed using Nutrition Data Systems for Research Software and multi-pass methods,19 with diet quality calculated using the Healthy Eating Index-2020 (HEI).20 Weekly minutes of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity was assessed with waist-worn accelerometers as published previously.14 Online surveys captured patient reported outcomes (REDCap®, Vanderbilt University, TN) using validated scales: (1) global physical, mental, and social quality-of-life (QOL), perceived stress, depression, anxiety, fatigue, sleep, and pain (PROMIS);21 (2) EuroQOL-5D-5L;22 and (3) healthcare utilization;23 and falls.24 Surveys also captured self-efficacy,25 social support,26 and barriers to consuming a healthy, low-calorie diet,27 targeted by the Social Cognitive Theory (SCT)-based intervention.28 Socio-demographic variables (e.g., education, race) and height were collected at baseline, whereas all other measures were assessed at baseline and 6-months (with health events, healthcare utilization and behavioral mediators also assessed at 3-months). Additionally, participants were encouraged to report any health events upon occurrence by notifying the study staff via email, text, or telephone. Over the 24-week intervention, intervention usage was tracked via time-stamped logs by the website platform, and Facebook group participation was tracked through Facebook. At 6-month follow-up a debriefing survey queried intervention arm participants on their website use and if they shared materials with friends and family members. After baseline assessments, 25% of participants were randomized to the AMPLIFY-Diet intervention and 50% to a waitlist control (25% were assigned to a separate AMPLIFY lifestyle RCT). A biostatistician with no participant contact generated the permutated block (size=4) randomization sequence using SAS (Version 9.4, Cary, NC). The intervention focused solely on diet (as another AMPLIFY trial focused on physical activity) and was adapted from the efficacy-proven RENEW intervention (originally delivered using telephone counseling and tailored mailed print)12 to web use through formative research involving focus groups and 2-phased beta-testing.29,30 Caloric levels were set to assure a safe rate of weight loss (0.5 kg/week) for this older, sarcopenia-prone population.31 A diet rich in vegetables, fruits and whole grains, with limited sugar, refined grains, and red and processed meats was promoted according to the World Cancer Research Foundation–American Institute of Cancer Research and American Cancer Society guidelines.5,32 The fully-automated, 24-week serialized intervention was accessed online via a password protected ID and delivered through weekly interactive topic-driven sessions (averaging 20 minutes in length) and >100 online tools for setting diet-related goals and tracking progress (that triggered individualized feedback). The intervention, guided by SCT, was designed to promote self-efficacy (e.g., role modelling opportunities to overcome barriers), and social support (e.g., strategies to engender social support from family and friends and encouraging participation in community activities and a private Facebook group). Accordingly, incremental goal setting and reinforcement guided participants towards consuming ≥5 servings/day of vegetables and fruit, and whole grains constituting ≥half of bread/cereal intake, while limiting fried and fast food to <once weekly, sugar, sugar-sweetened beverages and desserts to ≤twice weekly, and red and processed meats to ≤12 ounces/week (women) and ≤18 ounces/week (men). Ultimate goals also included the exclusion of alcohol (with uppermost thresholds of 1–2 servings/day for women and men, respectively). Programming offered tailored guidance on managing common nutrient-drug interactions and dietary needs (e.g., warfarin-use, gluten-free, vegetarian/vegan, or various treatment- or budget-driven concerns). Twice weekly prompts notified participants of the posting of a new session and its related materials or encouraged participants to log their progress. Prompts were delivered via text message, email, or both, based on the participant’s preference. Waitlisted participants received six monthly modules on survivorship topics unrelated to diet or exercise (e.g., sleep, cancer surveillance). These modules were offered through the study website to improve retention. After 6-month follow-up, participants transitioned to a third AMPLIFY RCT. The diet intervention arm was assigned to an exercise intervention, and waitlist controls were assigned to a combined diet-exercise intervention.14. Baseline-to-6-month attainment of ≥3% weight loss served as the primary outcome – a benchmark deemed clinically significant for improving cardiometabolic health by the American College of Cardiology, the American Heart Association, and The Obesity Society.33 Based on the RENEW trial results,12 a 16.6% between-arm difference was assumed;12 thus, with 130 versus 260 participants in the intervention and waitlisted arms, respectively (and 20% attrition), there was >90% power.14 Participant characteristics were summarized using descriptive statistics. Normality of distribution was confirmed for continuous variables using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and graphical displays. Log transformed analyses were performed for non-normally distributed variables; however, given similarities with original findings, the non-transformed results are reported. Probable outliers for circulating biomarkers were capped [mean + 2 SD] prior to statistical analysis to improve estimate precision and reduce the potential bias of extreme values on results. Statistical tests were two-sided (alpha=0.05). Statistical analyses were conducted with SAS, version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC), using an intent-to-treat approach with supplementary sensitivity analyses restricted to participants who completed at least one AMPLIFY-Diet session and both baseline and 6-month follow-up assessments. Logistic regression analyses were performed for the primary outcome (≥3% weight loss) and other binary outcomes, yielding odds ratios (OR), and 95% confidence intervals (95%CI). Continuous outcomes were explored using linear mixed-effects models for repeated measures, including fixed effects for group, time, and group-x-time interaction, with a random intercept for participants and estimated using restricted maximum likelihood. An unstructured covariance matrix, along with the Kenward-Roger procedure (to obtain more precise estimates of the denominator degrees of freedom and standard errors), were used. The mean change at 6 months-versus-baseline within each group and the difference in mean change between groups, along with corresponding standard errors and 95%CI, are reported. Linear mixed-effects models can accommodate missing data (without performing imputations for missing values) and unbalanced data patterns;34,35 therefore, all available observations were included in the intent-to-treat analysis. Detailed methods of the Adapting Multiple Behavior Interventions that Effectively Improve Cancer Survivor Health Program Project, including the AMPLIFY-Diet RCT as one-of-three integrated RCTs, were published previously.14 The AMPLIFY-Diet RCT was a 2-arm, single-blinded trial that tested the hypothesis that a higher proportion of cancer survivors assigned to AMPLIFY-Diet versus a waitlist control would experience clinically-significant weight loss. Between-arm differences in secondary outcomes (waist circumference [WC], diet quality, cardiometabolic markers, physical functioning) also were compared. The RCT was approved by the University of Alabama at Birmingham (single IRB:300002068), registered (ClinicalTrials.gov:NCT04000880) and conducted from March 2020 to March 2024. Survivors of one-of-nine obesity-related cancers having a 5-year survival >70% (early-stage multiple myeloma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma, localized renal and ovarian cancer, and loco-regional colorectal, prostate, endometrial, thyroid, and female breast cancer) were recruited across the contiguous continental United States through partnerships with five cancer registries, word-of-mouth, and an online presence. Cancer type and stage was verified by cancer registries, health systems, or private oncologists. Other inclusion criteria were: 1) current age ≥50 years; 2) Body Mass Index (BMI):25-<50 kg/m2; 3) English-speaking/writing; 4) ≥8th grade education; and 5) willingness and ability to receive email and participate in web-based instruction and assessment (four participants were provided with hotspots to meet this criterion). Exclusion criteria were: 1) enrollment in another diet, weight loss, or exercise program; 2) assisted/skilled nursing resident; or 3) unwillingness or inability to fully participate in the unsupervised, web-based intervention or remote assessment (e.g., severe hearing or vision loss; walker, wheelchair or oxygen-use; recent myocardial infarction). Eligible survivors were emailed or mailed study documents, which were reviewed with study staff via telephone; signed informed consent was obtained via mailed or electronic forms (AdobeSign®, San Jose, CA). Change in body weight was the primary outcome. Given the co-occurrence of trial initiation and COVID-19, physical assessments were adapted to remote means and tested for reliability and validity, demonstrating excellent concordance for weight, WC, the 30-second chair stand, timed up-and-go, and 2-minute step tests.15,16 Remote assessments were conducted by trained staff via Zoom®(San Jose, CA) who were blinded to arm assignment. Assessors guided blood pressure measurements using an automated sphygmomanometer (Omron3, Lake Forest, IL) and the collection of fasting dried blood spots (DBS) to assess cardiometabolic markers. Assessors also administered the Older Americans Resources and Services comorbidity survey.17 Supplies and instructions were mailed/emailed 2-weeks prior to assessments. DBS were frozen until assayed using methods published previously.18 Telephone-administered dietary recalls of a non-consecutive weekday and weekend day were performed using Nutrition Data Systems for Research Software and multi-pass methods,19 with diet quality calculated using the Healthy Eating Index-2020 (HEI).20 Weekly minutes of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity was assessed with waist-worn accelerometers as published previously.14 Online surveys captured patient reported outcomes (REDCap®, Vanderbilt University, TN) using validated scales: (1) global physical, mental, and social quality-of-life (QOL), perceived stress, depression, anxiety, fatigue, sleep, and pain (PROMIS);21 (2) EuroQOL-5D-5L;22 and (3) healthcare utilization;23 and falls.24 Surveys also captured self-efficacy,25 social support,26 and barriers to consuming a healthy, low-calorie diet,27 targeted by the Social Cognitive Theory (SCT)-based intervention.28 Socio-demographic variables (e.g., education, race) and height were collected at baseline, whereas all other measures were assessed at baseline and 6-months (with health events, healthcare utilization and behavioral mediators also assessed at 3-months). Additionally, participants were encouraged to report any health events upon occurrence by notifying the study staff via email, text, or telephone. Over the 24-week intervention, intervention usage was tracked via time-stamped logs by the website platform, and Facebook group participation was tracked through Facebook. At 6-month follow-up a debriefing survey queried intervention arm participants on their website use and if they shared materials with friends and family members. After baseline assessments, 25% of participants were randomized to the AMPLIFY-Diet intervention and 50% to a waitlist control (25% were assigned to a separate AMPLIFY lifestyle RCT). A biostatistician with no participant contact generated the permutated block (size=4) randomization sequence using SAS (Version 9.4, Cary, NC). The intervention focused solely on diet (as another AMPLIFY trial focused on physical activity) and was adapted from the efficacy-proven RENEW intervention (originally delivered using telephone counseling and tailored mailed print)12 to web use through formative research involving focus groups and 2-phased beta-testing.29,30 Caloric levels were set to assure a safe rate of weight loss (0.5 kg/week) for this older, sarcopenia-prone population.31 A diet rich in vegetables, fruits and whole grains, with limited sugar, refined grains, and red and processed meats was promoted according to the World Cancer Research Foundation–American Institute of Cancer Research and American Cancer Society guidelines.5,32 The fully-automated, 24-week serialized intervention was accessed online via a password protected ID and delivered through weekly interactive topic-driven sessions (averaging 20 minutes in length) and >100 online tools for setting diet-related goals and tracking progress (that triggered individualized feedback). The intervention, guided by SCT, was designed to promote self-efficacy (e.g., role modelling opportunities to overcome barriers), and social support (e.g., strategies to engender social support from family and friends and encouraging participation in community activities and a private Facebook group). Accordingly, incremental goal setting and reinforcement guided participants towards consuming ≥5 servings/day of vegetables and fruit, and whole grains constituting ≥half of bread/cereal intake, while limiting fried and fast food to <once weekly, sugar, sugar-sweetened beverages and desserts to ≤twice weekly, and red and processed meats to ≤12 ounces/week (women) and ≤18 ounces/week (men). Ultimate goals also included the exclusion of alcohol (with uppermost thresholds of 1–2 servings/day for women and men, respectively). Programming offered tailored guidance on managing common nutrient-drug interactions and dietary needs (e.g., warfarin-use, gluten-free, vegetarian/vegan, or various treatment- or budget-driven concerns). Twice weekly prompts notified participants of the posting of a new session and its related materials or encouraged participants to log their progress. Prompts were delivered via text message, email, or both, based on the participant’s preference. Waitlisted participants received six monthly modules on survivorship topics unrelated to diet or exercise (e.g., sleep, cancer surveillance). These modules were offered through the study website to improve retention. After 6-month follow-up, participants transitioned to a third AMPLIFY RCT. The diet intervention arm was assigned to an exercise intervention, and waitlist controls were assigned to a combined diet-exercise intervention.14. Baseline-to-6-month attainment of ≥3% weight loss served as the primary outcome – a benchmark deemed clinically significant for improving cardiometabolic health by the American College of Cardiology, the American Heart Association, and The Obesity Society.33 Based on the RENEW trial results,12 a 16.6% between-arm difference was assumed;12 thus, with 130 versus 260 participants in the intervention and waitlisted arms, respectively (and 20% attrition), there was >90% power.14 Participant characteristics were summarized using descriptive statistics. Normality of distribution was confirmed for continuous variables using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test and graphical displays. Log transformed analyses were performed for non-normally distributed variables; however, given similarities with original findings, the non-transformed results are reported. Probable outliers for circulating biomarkers were capped [mean + 2 SD] prior to statistical analysis to improve estimate precision and reduce the potential bias of extreme values on results. Statistical tests were two-sided (alpha=0.05). Statistical analyses were conducted with SAS, version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC), using an intent-to-treat approach with supplementary sensitivity analyses restricted to participants who completed at least one AMPLIFY-Diet session and both baseline and 6-month follow-up assessments. Logistic regression analyses were performed for the primary outcome (≥3% weight loss) and other binary outcomes, yielding odds ratios (OR), and 95% confidence intervals (95%CI). Continuous outcomes were explored using linear mixed-effects models for repeated measures, including fixed effects for group, time, and group-x-time interaction, with a random intercept for participants and estimated using restricted maximum likelihood. An unstructured covariance matrix, along with the Kenward-Roger procedure (to obtain more precise estimates of the denominator degrees of freedom and standard errors), were used. The mean change at 6 months-versus-baseline within each group and the difference in mean change between groups, along with corresponding standard errors and 95%CI, are reported. Linear mixed-effects models can accommodate missing data (without performing imputations for missing values) and unbalanced data patterns;34,35 therefore, all available observations were included in the intent-to-treat analysis. The results of this trial showed that the AMPLIFY-Diet intervention was highly efficacious. It produced a mean between-arm weight loss of 4.75%, far surpassing the 3.4% weight loss produced by any fully-automated intervention to date.36,37 This greater than expected effect was significantly correlated with the 60.3% rate of engagement which also surpassed the average of 23.1% previously reported in a review of web-based lifestyle interventions by Kelders et al.38 Moreover, these results were achieved in a sample that was older, sicker, and more diverse than any other trial. This RCT was designed to detect a 3% weight loss, which is deemed clinically significant.33 More than half of AMPLIFY-Diet participants achieved that goal, while roughly 42% achieved 5% weight loss and 15% exceeded the 10% weight loss threshold cited by Fabian et al.39 as associated with cancer-risk reduction. The significant reduction in circulating leptin levels, an adipokine long implicated in cancer progression due to its impact on lipotoxicity and crosstalk with several growth factors and their receptors,40–43 provides evidence of a potential mechanism. The mean between-arm difference of −2011.6 ng/mL is particularly compelling given findings of Yoon et al,41 who reported that cancer risk decreases by 5% for each 5 ng/mL decrease in leptin. The decrease in leptin also has implications for cardiovascular disease, diabetes, bone health, and neurocognition.44,45 We speculate that the improvements in cognitive function observed with the AMPLIFY-Diet intervention may have been mediated via leptin-associated pathways.45 Alternately, improved cognition may be due to increases in vegetables and whole grains that mimic the Mediterranean diet.46 AMPLIFY-Diet also had positive effects on other health outcomes, such as reduced systolic blood pressure and improved physical performance (30-second chair stand). These effects align with the ever-growing body of research which shows that weight loss interventions reduce blood pressure and improve physical functioning.31,33,47,48 The increase in serum cholesterol among both study arms, but especially within the intervention arm was puzzling. Although the results of the intent-to-treat analysis were not borne-out by the sensitivity analysis, the data are unusual. Analyses of DBS have shown high precision,49 though a study by Crimmins et al.50 suggests that longer storage, especially under suboptimal conditions, may accelerate degradation and could have influenced findings. Also Phinney et al.51 report transient increases in serum cholesterol that accompany adipose tissue mobilization with very low calorie diets; however, given that AMPLIFY-Diet purposely promoted slow weight loss over 6-months, this explanation is unlikely. . The AMPLIFY-Diet intervention also resulted in significant reductions in caloric intake and in foods like sugar-sweetened beverages that contribute to energy load. Moreover, several improvements were observed in food groups that contribute to diet quality, though the mean between-arm differences in overall diet quality of 2.4-to-3.3 points fell below the 5–6 points deemed clinically significant.52 However, the intervention did not target all components of the HEI-2020, such as dairy, so a lower increase is to be expected. Unlike dietary factors, alcohol intake did not appear responsive to the intervention, possibly because of low intakes at baseline and likely floor effects. Given that the AMPLIFY intervention was grounded in SCT;28 it was expected to exert positive effects on behavioral constructs, such as overcoming barriers. However, social support is a challenge for web-based interventions due to the lack of interpersonal connection; yet these results suggest that AMPLIFY strategies, such as encouraging the sharing of program content to engender the support of family and friends, were likely effective. Like any trial, this RCT had weaknesses that resulted in potential bias, specifically its single-blinded design, reliance on field-based measures, multiple testing of outcomes for which the variability was broad, and enrollment of a sample that was highly educated, and had lower representation of males and survivors with specific cancers (e.g. non solid tumors). Moreover, because it was embedded within a larger program project and participants were assigned to another RCT after 6 months,14 the trial was unable to assess longer-term outcomes. However, these weaknesses are balanced by several strengths:(1) randomized controlled design; (2) large national sample in which there is strong representation of minority and rural older adults;53,54 (3) low and equivocal attrition across arms; and (4) an intervention that had been honed through decades of prior research and refinement.12,13,55–63 In conclusion, the AMPLIFY-Diet web-based intervention was safe, well accepted and elicited high rates of intervention uptake. The intervention demonstrated efficacy by significantly improving weight status and also improving dietary intake and other health benefits that may not be realized with GLP-1 agonists alone.64,65 Future directions include continued optimization and dissemination research in both clinical and non-clinical settings to evaluate acceptability among broader groups of patients.36