We used five publicly available datasets: (1) CullPDB53 of 6125 proteins, (2) CB513 of 513 proteins, (3) CASP1054 and (4) CASP1155 datasets containing 123 and 105 domain sequences, respectively, and (5) CAMEO (http://www.cameo3d.org/sp/6-months/) test proteins in the past 6 months (from 2014-12-05 to 2015-05-29). Meanwhile, datasets (2–5) are only used for test. The CullPDB dataset was constructed before CASP10 (i.e., May 2012) and any two proteins in this set share less than 25% sequence identity with each other. Following the same procedure in36, we divided CullPDB into two subsets for training and test, respectively, such that the training proteins share no more than 25% sequence identity with our test sets (2–4). Our training set consists of ~5600 CullPDB proteins and the remaining ~500 PDB proteins are used as the test data. In total there are 403 CAMEO test targets in the past 6 months and 179 proteins are kept for test after removing those sharing more than 25% sequence identity with the training set. The native SS labels of all the training and test proteins are generated by DSSP14. An alternative way to select non-redundant proteins for training and test is to pick one representative from each protein superfamily defined by CATH56 or SCOP57. By using test proteins in different superfamilies than the training proteins, we can reduce the bias incurred by the sequence profile similarity between the training and test proteins. To fulfill this, we use the publically available JPRED training and test data47 (http://www.compbio.dundee.ac.uk/jpred4/about.shtml), which has 1338 training and 149 test proteins, respectively, each of which belongs to a different superfamily. We compare our method DeepCNF-SS (abbreviated as DeepCNF) with the following programs: SSpro34, RaptorX-SS833, ICML201436 for 8-state SS prediction; and SSpro, RaptorX-SS8, PSIPRED24, SPINE-X12, JPRED47, for 3-state SS prediction. The SSpro package uses two prediction strategies: without template and with template (i.e., using a solved structure in PDB as template). All the other test methods do not make use of template information at all. All the programs are run with their parameters set according to their respective papers. The program derived from the ICML2014 method is not publicly available, so we cannot evaluate its performance on CASP10, CASP11 and CAMEO test sets. We cannot test Cheng’s deep learning method either because it is not publicly available. However, only minor improvement in Q3 accuracy over PSIPRED was reported by Cheng’s paper44. We measure the prediction results in terms of Q3 and Q8 accuracy. The Q3 (Q8) accuracy is defined as the percentage of residues for which the predicted secondary structures are correct32. For 3-state SS prediction, we also calculate the SOV (Segment of OVerlap) score49, which measures how well the observed and the predicted SS segments match. In particular, the SOV measure assigns a lower score to the prediction deviating from observed SS segment length distribution even if it has high Q3 accuracy (i.e., per-residue accuracy)31. A wrong prediction in the middle region of a SS segment results in a lower SOV score than a wrong prediction at the terminal regions. A detailed definition of SOV is described in32, and also in our Supplemental File. Our DeepCNF has only a hyper-parameter, i.e., the regularization factor, which is used to avoid overfitting. Once it is fixed, we can estimate all the model parameters by solving the optimization problem in Eq. (10). To choose the right regularization factor and examine the stability of our DeepCNF model, we conduct a five-fold cross-validation test. In particular, we randomly divide the training set (containing 5600 CullPDB proteins) into 5 subsets and then use 4 subsets as training and one as validation. Figure 3 shows the Q8 accuracy of our DeepCNF model with respect to the regularization factor. The optimal regularization factor is around 50, which yields 73.2% Q8 accuracy on average. At this point, the Q8 accuracy difference of all the models is less than 1%, consistent with the previous report33. The architecture of our DeepCNF model is mainly determined by the following 3 factors (see Fig. 2): (i) the number of hidden layers; (ii) the number of different neurons at each layer; and (iii) the window size at each layer. We fix the window size to 11 because the average length of an alpha helix is around eleven residues58 and that of a beta strand is around six59. To show the relationship between the performance and the number of hidden layers, we trained four different DeepCNF models with 1, 3, 5, and 7 layers, respectively. All the models use the same window size (i.e., 11) and the same number (i.e., 100) of different neurons at each layer. In total these four models have ~50 K, ~270 K, ~500 K, and ~700 K parameters, respectively. We trained the models with different regularization factors. As shown in Fig. 4A, when only one hidden layer is used, DeepCNF becomes CNF50 and its performance is quite similar to RaptorX-SS8 (single model) as shown in Table 1. When more layers are applied, the Q8 accuracy gradually improves. To balance the model complexity and performance, by default we set window size to 11 and use 5 hidden layers, each with 100 different neurons. To show that it is the deep convolutional structure but not the number of model parameters that mainly contributes to performance improvement, we trained four models with ~500 K model parameters but 4 different numbers of layers: 1, 3, 5 and 7. We still use the same window size at 11 and for each model all the layers have the same number of neurons. That is, for the 1-, 3-, 5- and 7-layer models, we use 1000, 140, 100, and 85 neurons for each layer, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4B, the models with more layers have better Q8 accuracy, although they have the same number of model parameters. Since the 7-layer model is only slightly better than the 5-layer model, to reduce computational complexity, in the following experimental results we use a DeepCNF model of 5 hidden layers and 100 neurons for each layer. The window size at each layer is set to 11. Tables 1, 2 and 3 show the Q8, Q3 accuracy, and SOV score of our method DeepCNF and the others on the five datasets. As listed in these tables, when templates are not used, our method significantly outperforms the others, including the popular PSIPRED, our old method RaptorX-SS833, SPINE-X and the recent deep learning method ICML201436. SSpro with template obtains very good accuracy on CullPDB, CB513 and CASP10, but not on CASP11 and CAMEO. This is because SSpro uses a template database built in 2013, covering only the former three sets but not CASP11 or CAMEO. Most CASP11 and CAMEO test proteins share <25% sequence identity with any template databases created before 2014. In terms of Q3 accuracy on CASP10, DeepCNF obtains 84.4%, even slightly outperforming SSpro with template (84.2%). In terms of both Q3 and Q8 accuracy on CASP11, DeepCNF obtains 83.8% and 71.9%, respectively, significantly outperforming SSpro with template (78.4% and 66.7%, respectively). The same trend is also observed on 179 CAMEO targets, where DeepCNF obtains 84.4% Q3 and 72.1% Q8 accuracy, respectively, much better than SSpro with template (78.9% and 65.7%, respectively). When only 85 CASP10 and CASP11 hard targets are evaluated, DeepCNF, PSIPRED, SPINE-X, JPRED, RaptorX-SS8, SSpro (with template) and SSpro (without template) have Q3 accuracy 82.2%, 77.9%, 77.1%, 78.5%, 76.2%, 76.9 and 75.4%, respectively, and SOV score 83.0%, 78.1%, 77.2%, 79.8%, 77.9%, 75.3% and 73.6%, respectively. All the methods have lower Q3 accuracy on these hard targets than on the whole datasets since all the test methods use sequence profiles as input features and a hard target usually has sparse sequence profile that carries little evolutionary information. In addition, the hard targets do not have good structure homologs in the training set, so a predictor cannot copy SS labels from the training data as prediction. However, our method even has a slightly larger advantage over the others on the CASP hard targets than on the whole CASP sets. This implies that our method is slightly better than the others in dealing with sparse sequence profiles and learning sequence-structure relationship from the training data. Similar results are observed on the 86 CAMEO hard targets, on which DeepCNF, PSIPRED, SPINE-X, JPRED, RaptorX-SS8, SSpro (with template) and SSpro (without template) have Q3 accuracy 82.1%, 78.0%, 77.6%, 77.7%, 76.8%, 77.0%, and 76.5%, respectively, and SOV score 81.7%, 77.1%, 74.8%, 78.2%, 73.7% , 72.6%, and 72.5%, respectively. The SOV score tolerates on small wrong predictions at the terminal regions of a segment while penalizes more on the erroneous predictions in the middle region of a segment49. As shown in Table 3, in terms of SOV score on all the five datasets, DeepCNF obtains 86.2%, 84.8%, 85.6%, 85.8%, and 84.5%, respectively, significantly outperforming all the other predictors including SSpro with template. These results show that DeepCNF could yield more meaningful SS predictions. This is mainly because our deep convolutional neural networks are better in predicting beta turn (T), high curvature loop (S), and irregular loop (L) states, which appear more often at the boundary of a helix or sheet segment. The other reason is that the conditional random fields in our method models the interdependency among adjacent residues in a SS segment, which helps reduce erroneous predictions in the middle region of a segment. Table 4 shows the recall and precision on each of the 8 states obtained by our method DeepCNF and the second best method ICML201436 on the CullPDB test set. Both methods fail on state I since it is too rare to even appear in the test set. The result of the ICML 2014 method is taken from its paper. Overall, our method obtains better recall and precision for each state, especially those non-ordinary states such as G, S and T. For the high curvature loop (S), our method has recall and precision 0.323 and 0.543, respectively, while ICML2014 obtains 0.159 and 0.423. For beta turn (T), our method obtains recall and precision 0.594 and 0.613, respectively, while ICML2014 obtains 0.506 and 0.548, respectively. DeepCNF also outperforms ICML2014 for the loop (L) state. This result could be due to the fact that S, T, and L state may be impacted by medium-range information on the protein sequence36 and our method is better than the others in modeling this kind of information. Our DeepCNF has a similar performance trend on the CB513 test set (see Table 5). DeepCNF outperforms ICML2014, especially on those non-ordinary states, as well as the ordinary beta sheet state. The largest advantage lies in predicting curvature loop (S) and 310 helix (G). We cannot do a detailed comparison between our method and the ICML2014 method on the other test sets since the program derived from the ICML2014 method is not publicly available. We further examine the performance of DeepCNF with respect to the amount of homologous information measured by Neff 33. The Neff of a protein measures the average number of effective amino acids across all the residues, ranging from 1 to 20 since there are only 20 amino acids in nature. A small Neff indicates that the protein has a sparse sequence profile. By contrast, a large Neff implies that the protein may have a large amount of homologous information. Figure 5 shows the Q3 accuracy of the five tested methods on the CB513 and the two CASP datasets with respect to Neff. When Neff ≤ 2, DeepCNF performs slightly better than the others. However, when Neff > 2, DeepCNF greatly outperforms the others. We used 25% sequence identity as cutoff to remove redundancy between the training and test sets. Although the training and test proteins may not have similar primary sequences, their sequence profiles may be still similar, so one may wonder if our improvement is due to the sequence profile similarity between the test and training proteins. We conducted one stricter experiment to study this problem. In particular, we retrained our DeepCNF models using the 1338 JPRED training proteins and tested the resultant models on the 149 JPRED test proteins47. All the test and training proteins belong to different superfamilies. That is, it is unlikely that one test protein shares similar sequence profile with one training protein. The sequence profiles of these JPRED training and test proteins are generated from an NR database dated in 2012-10-26. We divided the training set into 7 groups according to the JPRED cross-validation sets (available at http://www.compbio.dundee.ac.uk/jpred4/about.shtml) and then trained 7 DeepCNF models separately. Each model is trained by the proteins in 6 groups. Tested on the 149 JPRED test proteins, the resultant 7 DeepCNF models have an average Q3 accuracy of 84.9% (see Supplemental Table 1), far better than what can be obtained by the other methods. For example, on this test set, JPRED, which is one of the best SS predictors, has Q3 accuracy 82.1%. This experimental result indicates that the improvement mainly comes from the DeepCNF model itself instead of the profile similarity between the test and training proteins. In fact, as shown in previous sections, our method also greatly outperforms the others on the CASP11 and CAMEO hard targets (which do not have similar profiles as our training proteins), which further confirms this conclusion. We used five publicly available datasets: (1) CullPDB53 of 6125 proteins, (2) CB513 of 513 proteins, (3) CASP1054 and (4) CASP1155 datasets containing 123 and 105 domain sequences, respectively, and (5) CAMEO (http://www.cameo3d.org/sp/6-months/) test proteins in the past 6 months (from 2014-12-05 to 2015-05-29). Meanwhile, datasets (2–5) are only used for test. The CullPDB dataset was constructed before CASP10 (i.e., May 2012) and any two proteins in this set share less than 25% sequence identity with each other. Following the same procedure in36, we divided CullPDB into two subsets for training and test, respectively, such that the training proteins share no more than 25% sequence identity with our test sets (2–4). Our training set consists of ~5600 CullPDB proteins and the remaining ~500 PDB proteins are used as the test data. In total there are 403 CAMEO test targets in the past 6 months and 179 proteins are kept for test after removing those sharing more than 25% sequence identity with the training set. The native SS labels of all the training and test proteins are generated by DSSP14. An alternative way to select non-redundant proteins for training and test is to pick one representative from each protein superfamily defined by CATH56 or SCOP57. By using test proteins in different superfamilies than the training proteins, we can reduce the bias incurred by the sequence profile similarity between the training and test proteins. To fulfill this, we use the publically available JPRED training and test data47 (http://www.compbio.dundee.ac.uk/jpred4/about.shtml), which has 1338 training and 149 test proteins, respectively, each of which belongs to a different superfamily. We compare our method DeepCNF-SS (abbreviated as DeepCNF) with the following programs: SSpro34, RaptorX-SS833, ICML201436 for 8-state SS prediction; and SSpro, RaptorX-SS8, PSIPRED24, SPINE-X12, JPRED47, for 3-state SS prediction. The SSpro package uses two prediction strategies: without template and with template (i.e., using a solved structure in PDB as template). All the other test methods do not make use of template information at all. All the programs are run with their parameters set according to their respective papers. The program derived from the ICML2014 method is not publicly available, so we cannot evaluate its performance on CASP10, CASP11 and CAMEO test sets. We cannot test Cheng’s deep learning method either because it is not publicly available. However, only minor improvement in Q3 accuracy over PSIPRED was reported by Cheng’s paper44. We measure the prediction results in terms of Q3 and Q8 accuracy. The Q3 (Q8) accuracy is defined as the percentage of residues for which the predicted secondary structures are correct32. For 3-state SS prediction, we also calculate the SOV (Segment of OVerlap) score49, which measures how well the observed and the predicted SS segments match. In particular, the SOV measure assigns a lower score to the prediction deviating from observed SS segment length distribution even if it has high Q3 accuracy (i.e., per-residue accuracy)31. A wrong prediction in the middle region of a SS segment results in a lower SOV score than a wrong prediction at the terminal regions. A detailed definition of SOV is described in32, and also in our Supplemental File. Our DeepCNF has only a hyper-parameter, i.e., the regularization factor, which is used to avoid overfitting. Once it is fixed, we can estimate all the model parameters by solving the optimization problem in Eq. (10). To choose the right regularization factor and examine the stability of our DeepCNF model, we conduct a five-fold cross-validation test. In particular, we randomly divide the training set (containing 5600 CullPDB proteins) into 5 subsets and then use 4 subsets as training and one as validation. Figure 3 shows the Q8 accuracy of our DeepCNF model with respect to the regularization factor. The optimal regularization factor is around 50, which yields 73.2% Q8 accuracy on average. At this point, the Q8 accuracy difference of all the models is less than 1%, consistent with the previous report33. The architecture of our DeepCNF model is mainly determined by the following 3 factors (see Fig. 2): (i) the number of hidden layers; (ii) the number of different neurons at each layer; and (iii) the window size at each layer. We fix the window size to 11 because the average length of an alpha helix is around eleven residues58 and that of a beta strand is around six59. To show the relationship between the performance and the number of hidden layers, we trained four different DeepCNF models with 1, 3, 5, and 7 layers, respectively. All the models use the same window size (i.e., 11) and the same number (i.e., 100) of different neurons at each layer. In total these four models have ~50 K, ~270 K, ~500 K, and ~700 K parameters, respectively. We trained the models with different regularization factors. As shown in Fig. 4A, when only one hidden layer is used, DeepCNF becomes CNF50 and its performance is quite similar to RaptorX-SS8 (single model) as shown in Table 1. When more layers are applied, the Q8 accuracy gradually improves. To balance the model complexity and performance, by default we set window size to 11 and use 5 hidden layers, each with 100 different neurons. To show that it is the deep convolutional structure but not the number of model parameters that mainly contributes to performance improvement, we trained four models with ~500 K model parameters but 4 different numbers of layers: 1, 3, 5 and 7. We still use the same window size at 11 and for each model all the layers have the same number of neurons. That is, for the 1-, 3-, 5- and 7-layer models, we use 1000, 140, 100, and 85 neurons for each layer, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4B, the models with more layers have better Q8 accuracy, although they have the same number of model parameters. Since the 7-layer model is only slightly better than the 5-layer model, to reduce computational complexity, in the following experimental results we use a DeepCNF model of 5 hidden layers and 100 neurons for each layer. The window size at each layer is set to 11. Tables 1, 2 and 3 show the Q8, Q3 accuracy, and SOV score of our method DeepCNF and the others on the five datasets. As listed in these tables, when templates are not used, our method significantly outperforms the others, including the popular PSIPRED, our old method RaptorX-SS833, SPINE-X and the recent deep learning method ICML201436. SSpro with template obtains very good accuracy on CullPDB, CB513 and CASP10, but not on CASP11 and CAMEO. This is because SSpro uses a template database built in 2013, covering only the former three sets but not CASP11 or CAMEO. Most CASP11 and CAMEO test proteins share <25% sequence identity with any template databases created before 2014. In terms of Q3 accuracy on CASP10, DeepCNF obtains 84.4%, even slightly outperforming SSpro with template (84.2%). In terms of both Q3 and Q8 accuracy on CASP11, DeepCNF obtains 83.8% and 71.9%, respectively, significantly outperforming SSpro with template (78.4% and 66.7%, respectively). The same trend is also observed on 179 CAMEO targets, where DeepCNF obtains 84.4% Q3 and 72.1% Q8 accuracy, respectively, much better than SSpro with template (78.9% and 65.7%, respectively). When only 85 CASP10 and CASP11 hard targets are evaluated, DeepCNF, PSIPRED, SPINE-X, JPRED, RaptorX-SS8, SSpro (with template) and SSpro (without template) have Q3 accuracy 82.2%, 77.9%, 77.1%, 78.5%, 76.2%, 76.9 and 75.4%, respectively, and SOV score 83.0%, 78.1%, 77.2%, 79.8%, 77.9%, 75.3% and 73.6%, respectively. All the methods have lower Q3 accuracy on these hard targets than on the whole datasets since all the test methods use sequence profiles as input features and a hard target usually has sparse sequence profile that carries little evolutionary information. In addition, the hard targets do not have good structure homologs in the training set, so a predictor cannot copy SS labels from the training data as prediction. However, our method even has a slightly larger advantage over the others on the CASP hard targets than on the whole CASP sets. This implies that our method is slightly better than the others in dealing with sparse sequence profiles and learning sequence-structure relationship from the training data. Similar results are observed on the 86 CAMEO hard targets, on which DeepCNF, PSIPRED, SPINE-X, JPRED, RaptorX-SS8, SSpro (with template) and SSpro (without template) have Q3 accuracy 82.1%, 78.0%, 77.6%, 77.7%, 76.8%, 77.0%, and 76.5%, respectively, and SOV score 81.7%, 77.1%, 74.8%, 78.2%, 73.7% , 72.6%, and 72.5%, respectively. The SOV score tolerates on small wrong predictions at the terminal regions of a segment while penalizes more on the erroneous predictions in the middle region of a segment49. As shown in Table 3, in terms of SOV score on all the five datasets, DeepCNF obtains 86.2%, 84.8%, 85.6%, 85.8%, and 84.5%, respectively, significantly outperforming all the other predictors including SSpro with template. These results show that DeepCNF could yield more meaningful SS predictions. This is mainly because our deep convolutional neural networks are better in predicting beta turn (T), high curvature loop (S), and irregular loop (L) states, which appear more often at the boundary of a helix or sheet segment. The other reason is that the conditional random fields in our method models the interdependency among adjacent residues in a SS segment, which helps reduce erroneous predictions in the middle region of a segment. Table 4 shows the recall and precision on each of the 8 states obtained by our method DeepCNF and the second best method ICML201436 on the CullPDB test set. Both methods fail on state I since it is too rare to even appear in the test set. The result of the ICML 2014 method is taken from its paper. Overall, our method obtains better recall and precision for each state, especially those non-ordinary states such as G, S and T. For the high curvature loop (S), our method has recall and precision 0.323 and 0.543, respectively, while ICML2014 obtains 0.159 and 0.423. For beta turn (T), our method obtains recall and precision 0.594 and 0.613, respectively, while ICML2014 obtains 0.506 and 0.548, respectively. DeepCNF also outperforms ICML2014 for the loop (L) state. This result could be due to the fact that S, T, and L state may be impacted by medium-range information on the protein sequence36 and our method is better than the others in modeling this kind of information. Our DeepCNF has a similar performance trend on the CB513 test set (see Table 5). DeepCNF outperforms ICML2014, especially on those non-ordinary states, as well as the ordinary beta sheet state. The largest advantage lies in predicting curvature loop (S) and 310 helix (G). We cannot do a detailed comparison between our method and the ICML2014 method on the other test sets since the program derived from the ICML2014 method is not publicly available. We further examine the performance of DeepCNF with respect to the amount of homologous information measured by Neff 33. The Neff of a protein measures the average number of effective amino acids across all the residues, ranging from 1 to 20 since there are only 20 amino acids in nature. A small Neff indicates that the protein has a sparse sequence profile. By contrast, a large Neff implies that the protein may have a large amount of homologous information. Figure 5 shows the Q3 accuracy of the five tested methods on the CB513 and the two CASP datasets with respect to Neff. When Neff ≤ 2, DeepCNF performs slightly better than the others. However, when Neff > 2, DeepCNF greatly outperforms the others. We used 25% sequence identity as cutoff to remove redundancy between the training and test sets. Although the training and test proteins may not have similar primary sequences, their sequence profiles may be still similar, so one may wonder if our improvement is due to the sequence profile similarity between the test and training proteins. We conducted one stricter experiment to study this problem. In particular, we retrained our DeepCNF models using the 1338 JPRED training proteins and tested the resultant models on the 149 JPRED test proteins47. All the test and training proteins belong to different superfamilies. That is, it is unlikely that one test protein shares similar sequence profile with one training protein. The sequence profiles of these JPRED training and test proteins are generated from an NR database dated in 2012-10-26. We divided the training set into 7 groups according to the JPRED cross-validation sets (available at http://www.compbio.dundee.ac.uk/jpred4/about.shtml) and then trained 7 DeepCNF models separately. Each model is trained by the proteins in 6 groups. Tested on the 149 JPRED test proteins, the resultant 7 DeepCNF models have an average Q3 accuracy of 84.9% (see Supplemental Table 1), far better than what can be obtained by the other methods. For example, on this test set, JPRED, which is one of the best SS predictors, has Q3 accuracy 82.1%. This experimental result indicates that the improvement mainly comes from the DeepCNF model itself instead of the profile similarity between the test and training proteins. In fact, as shown in previous sections, our method also greatly outperforms the others on the CASP11 and CAMEO hard targets (which do not have similar profiles as our training proteins), which further confirms this conclusion. We have presented a new sequence labeling method, called DeepCNF (Deep Convolutional Neural Fields), for protein secondary structure prediction. This new method can not only model complex sequence-structure relationship by a deep hierarchical architecture, but also exploit interdependency between adjacent SS labels. The overall performance of DeepCNF is significantly better than the state-of-the-art methods, breaking the long-lasting ~80% Q3 accuracy34. DeepCNF is even better than the other methods in terms of SOV score. In particular, DeepCNF performs much better on the SS types which are challenging to predict, such as high curvature region (state S), beta loop (state T), and irregular loop (state L). DeepCNF also performs reasonably well on proteins without any good homologs in PDB, better than the other methods. However, DeepCNF has no significant advantage over the others when a protein under prediction has very sparse sequence profile (i.e., Neff ≤ 2). That is, it is still challenging to predict SS structure from primary sequence instead of sequence profile. In addition to secondary structure prediction, DeepCNF can be directly applied to many sequence labelling problems50606162. For example, DeepCNF can be used to predict solvent accessibility346364, contact number65, structural alphabet66676869 and order/disorder regions707172, which are useful for other purposes such as protein threading, remote homology detection737475, and protein model quality assessment7677. As shown in Fig. 2, DeepCNF consists of two modules: (a) the Conditional Random Fields (CRF) module consisting of the top layer and the label layer, and (b) the deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) module covering the input to the top layer. When only one hidden layer is used, this DeepCNF becomes Conditional Neural Fields (CNF), a probabilistic graphical model described in50. Given a protein sequence of length L, let denote its SS where Yi is the SS type at residue i. Let denote the input feature where Xi is a column vector representing the input feature for residue i. Using DeepCNF, we calculate the conditional probability of Y on the input X as follows, where is the potential function quantifying correlation among adjacent SS types at around position i, is the potential function modeling relationship between Yi and input features for position i, and Z(X) is the partition function. Formally, Ψ() and Φ() are defined as follows, where a and b represent secondary structure states, δ() is an indicator function, Hm(X, i, W) is a neural network function for the m-th neuron at position i of the top layer, and W, U, and T are the model parameters to be trained. Specifically, W is the parameter for the neural network, U is the parameter connecting the top layer to the label layer, and T is for label correlation. Below see the details of the deep convolutional neural network for Hm(X, i, W). Figure 6 shows two adjacent layers. Let Mk be the number of neurons for a single position at the k-th layer. Let Xi(m) be the m-th feature at the input layer for residue i and denote the output value of the m-th neuron of position i at layer k. When k = 1, Hk is actually the input feature X. Otherwise, Hk is a matrix of dimension L × Mk. Let 2 Nk + 1 be the window size at the k-th layer. Mathematically, is defined as follows. Meanwhile, h() is the activation function, either the sigmoid (i.e., 1/(1 + exp(−x))) or the tanh (i.e., (1 − exp(−2x))/(1 + exp(−2x))) function. where (−Nk ≤ n ≤ Nk) is a 2D weight matrix for the connections between the neurons of position i + n at layer k and the neurons of position i at layer k + 1. is shared by all the positions in the same layer, so it is position-independent. Here m′ and m index two neurons at the k-th and (k + 1)-th layers, respectively. Similar to CRF52, we train the model parameters by maximum-likelihood. The log-likelihood is as follows. To train the model parameters, we need to calculate the gradient with respect to each parameter. We calculate the gradient first for CRF and then for DCNN. The gradient of the log-likelihood with respect to the parameters T and U is given by, where EXP is the expectation function and can be calculated efficiently using the forward-backward algorithm5052. As shown in Fig. 7, we can calculate the neuron error values at the k-th layer in a back-propagation mode as follows. where g() is the derivative of the activation function; it is g(x) = (1 − x)x and g(x) = 1 − x2 for the sigmoid and tanh function, respectively. Ek is the neuron error value matrix at the k-th layer, with dimension L × Mk. Ei(a) is the error of the log-likelihood function with respect to the label at the i-th position and can be calculated by the forward-backward algorithm. Finally, the gradient of the parameter W at the k-th layer is: To reduce over-fitting, the log-likelihood objective function is penalized with a L2-norm of the model parameters. Thus, our final objective function is as follows. where θ is the set of model parameters and λ is the regularization factor used to avoid overfitting. Although DeepCNF has a large number of model parameters, by setting the regularization factor large enough, we can make the L2-norm of the model parameters small and thus, restrict the search space of the model parameter and avoid overfitting. However, a very large regularization factor (e.g., infinity) may restrict the model parameter into too small a search space and the resultant model may not learn enough from the training data (i.e., under-fitting). We will determine the regularization factor by cross-validation. Since the log-likelihood function is not convex, usually we can only solve the objective function to a local instead of global optimum. Although a typical way to train a deep network is to do it layer-by-layer, in our implementation we train all the model parameters simultaneously. We use the L-BFGS78 to search for the optimal model parameters, which has also been successfully used to train CRF and CNF5052. In addition to learning the model parameters simultaneously, we can also train them layer-by-layer in a supervised mode. Starting from the first layer (i.e., input feature), we train the model parameter W1 by removing the third to the K-th layers but keeping the label layer. After W1 is trained, we generate the neuron output values for the second layer and use them as input to train the model parameter W2 by removing the fourth to the K-th layers but keeping the label layer. We repeat this procedure until all the parameters are trained, and finally we fine-tune these parameters by simultaneous training. We used the input features described in36. In particular, for each protein sequence, we ran PSI-BLAST41 with E-value threshold 0.001 and 3 iterations to search UniRef9079 to generate the position specific scoring matrix (PSSM). We then transform PSSM by the sigmoid function 1/(1 + exp(−x)) where x is a PSSM entry. We also use a binary vector of 21 elements to indicate the amino acid type at position i. We use 21 since there might be some unknown amino acids in a protein sequence. In total there are 42 input features for each residue, 21 from PSSM and the other 21 from the primary sequence. Note that besides using PSSM generated by 3 iterations, we could also add the PSSM generated by 5 iterations into the input features. DeepCNF is available at http://raptorx.uchicago.edu/download/. As shown in Fig. 2, DeepCNF consists of two modules: (a) the Conditional Random Fields (CRF) module consisting of the top layer and the label layer, and (b) the deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) module covering the input to the top layer. When only one hidden layer is used, this DeepCNF becomes Conditional Neural Fields (CNF), a probabilistic graphical model described in50. Given a protein sequence of length L, let denote its SS where Yi is the SS type at residue i. Let denote the input feature where Xi is a column vector representing the input feature for residue i. Using DeepCNF, we calculate the conditional probability of Y on the input X as follows, where is the potential function quantifying correlation among adjacent SS types at around position i, is the potential function modeling relationship between Yi and input features for position i, and Z(X) is the partition function. Formally, Ψ() and Φ() are defined as follows, where a and b represent secondary structure states, δ() is an indicator function, Hm(X, i, W) is a neural network function for the m-th neuron at position i of the top layer, and W, U, and T are the model parameters to be trained. Specifically, W is the parameter for the neural network, U is the parameter connecting the top layer to the label layer, and T is for label correlation. Below see the details of the deep convolutional neural network for Hm(X, i, W). Figure 6 shows two adjacent layers. Let Mk be the number of neurons for a single position at the k-th layer. Let Xi(m) be the m-th feature at the input layer for residue i and denote the output value of the m-th neuron of position i at layer k. When k = 1, Hk is actually the input feature X. Otherwise, Hk is a matrix of dimension L × Mk. Let 2 Nk + 1 be the window size at the k-th layer. Mathematically, is defined as follows. Meanwhile, h() is the activation function, either the sigmoid (i.e., 1/(1 + exp(−x))) or the tanh (i.e., (1 − exp(−2x))/(1 + exp(−2x))) function. where (−Nk ≤ n ≤ Nk) is a 2D weight matrix for the connections between the neurons of position i + n at layer k and the neurons of position i at layer k + 1. is shared by all the positions in the same layer, so it is position-independent. Here m′ and m index two neurons at the k-th and (k + 1)-th layers, respectively. Similar to CRF52, we train the model parameters by maximum-likelihood. The log-likelihood is as follows. To train the model parameters, we need to calculate the gradient with respect to each parameter. We calculate the gradient first for CRF and then for DCNN. The gradient of the log-likelihood with respect to the parameters T and U is given by, where EXP is the expectation function and can be calculated efficiently using the forward-backward algorithm5052. As shown in Fig. 7, we can calculate the neuron error values at the k-th layer in a back-propagation mode as follows. where g() is the derivative of the activation function; it is g(x) = (1 − x)x and g(x) = 1 − x2 for the sigmoid and tanh function, respectively. Ek is the neuron error value matrix at the k-th layer, with dimension L × Mk. Ei(a) is the error of the log-likelihood function with respect to the label at the i-th position and can be calculated by the forward-backward algorithm. Finally, the gradient of the parameter W at the k-th layer is: To reduce over-fitting, the log-likelihood objective function is penalized with a L2-norm of the model parameters. Thus, our final objective function is as follows. where θ is the set of model parameters and λ is the regularization factor used to avoid overfitting. Although DeepCNF has a large number of model parameters, by setting the regularization factor large enough, we can make the L2-norm of the model parameters small and thus, restrict the search space of the model parameter and avoid overfitting. However, a very large regularization factor (e.g., infinity) may restrict the model parameter into too small a search space and the resultant model may not learn enough from the training data (i.e., under-fitting). We will determine the regularization factor by cross-validation. Since the log-likelihood function is not convex, usually we can only solve the objective function to a local instead of global optimum. Although a typical way to train a deep network is to do it layer-by-layer, in our implementation we train all the model parameters simultaneously. We use the L-BFGS78 to search for the optimal model parameters, which has also been successfully used to train CRF and CNF5052. In addition to learning the model parameters simultaneously, we can also train them layer-by-layer in a supervised mode. Starting from the first layer (i.e., input feature), we train the model parameter W1 by removing the third to the K-th layers but keeping the label layer. After W1 is trained, we generate the neuron output values for the second layer and use them as input to train the model parameter W2 by removing the fourth to the K-th layers but keeping the label layer. We repeat this procedure until all the parameters are trained, and finally we fine-tune these parameters by simultaneous training. We used the input features described in36. In particular, for each protein sequence, we ran PSI-BLAST41 with E-value threshold 0.001 and 3 iterations to search UniRef9079 to generate the position specific scoring matrix (PSSM). We then transform PSSM by the sigmoid function 1/(1 + exp(−x)) where x is a PSSM entry. We also use a binary vector of 21 elements to indicate the amino acid type at position i. We use 21 since there might be some unknown amino acids in a protein sequence. In total there are 42 input features for each residue, 21 from PSSM and the other 21 from the primary sequence. Note that besides using PSSM generated by 3 iterations, we could also add the PSSM generated by 5 iterations into the input features. DeepCNF is available at http://raptorx.uchicago.edu/download/. How to cite this article: Wang, S. et al. Protein Secondary Structure Prediction Using Deep Convolutional Neural Fields. Sci. Rep. 6, 18962; doi: 10.1038/srep18962 (2016).