Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are promising molecules to treat infectious diseases caused by multi-drug resistance pathogens, some types of cancer, and other conditions. Computer-aided strategies are efficient tools for the high-throughput screening of AMPs. This report highlights StarPep Toolbox, an open-source and user-friendly software to study the bioactive chemical space of AMPs using complex network-based representations, clustering, and similarity-searching models. The novelty of this research lies in the combination of network science and similarity-searching techniques, distinguishing it from conventional methods based on machine learning and other computational approaches. The network-based representation of the AMP chemical space presents promising opportunities for peptide drug repurposing, development, and optimization. This approach could serve as a baseline for the discovery of a new generation of therapeutics peptides. All underlying code and installation files are accessible through GitHub (https://github.com/Grupo-Medicina-Molecular-y-Traslacional/StarPep) under the Apache 2.0 license. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are small molecules (generally ∼50 amino acids) presented as potential drugs to treat infectious diseases caused by multi-drug resistance pathogens (Browne et al. 2020), some types of cancers (Roudi et al. 2017), and other complex conditions (Mahlapuu et al. 2020). The efficiency of AMPs relies on their wide microbicidal and/or immunomodulating properties, the slow emergence of antimicrobial resistance, and their multifunctional activities (e.g. antibacterial, antiviral, antiparasitic, anticancer, etc.) (Browne et al. 2020). The FDA has approved more than 80 peptide-based drugs, and many more are in different phases of clinical trials (Usmani et al. 2017), making them potential therapeutic agents. In silico peptide drug discovery relies on the availability of large, diverse, and non-redundant databases of AMPs, which have been developed over the last few decades (Browne et al. 2020). The growing number of databases holds a valuable source of knowledge, but a comparative study by some of the authors of this work argued that there is an overlap in content among existing databases due to the multiple functions of AMPs (Aguilera-Mendoza et al. 2015). Because of this overlapping, a representative set of 45 120 AMPs and their biological annotations are present in StarPepDB (Aguilera-Mendoza et al. 2019), a graph database that integrated peptides and their metadata from 40 databases. StarPepDB has been used to create alignment-free machine-learning classifiers to predict several AMP-related activities (Pinacho-Castellanos et al. 2021). This study introduces the StarPep toolbox software, which incorporates the StarPepDB to retrieve AMPs and employs functionalities grounded in network science and similarity searching to analyze these molecules. The software aims to explore the chemical space of AMPs and facilitate the discovery and repurposing of novel molecules for peptide drug design and optimization. Figure 1 shows the main modules and components of the StarPep toolbox. This software has four main modules: (i) load and filter AMPs from the internal StarPepDB or an external file (imported as a FASTA file), (ii) calculate optimized molecular descriptors (MDs) set to define a multidimensional descriptor space from the selected set of AMPs, (iii) create and visualize complex networks (metadata or similarity networks) for understanding hidden knowledge in data, and (iv) develop multi-query similarity-searching models (mQSSMs) to predict biological functions of AMPs. The functionalities of each module are explained in detail below. StarPep modules and components. The software has four main modules to load and filter AMPs, calculate MDs, create, and analyze networks, and develop mQSSMs. StarPep toolbox allows users to retrieve a subset of AMPs from the StarPepDB using their metadata (function, target pathogen, biological origin, chemical modifications, original database, and cross-referenced entries to Protein Data Bank, PubMed, and UniProt). It is also possible to find AMPs that share a given sequence identity above a threshold with single or multiple queries from the StarPepDB or an external sequence. Moreover, the software can create a non-redundant set of AMPs where any pair of sequences share no more than a given threshold of sequence identity. The user can choose the parameters to calculate the sequence identity (i.e. global, or local alignment algorithm, the substitution matrix, etc.). Finally, the software enables filtering out AMPs from the StarPepDB by peptide attributes (sequence or length), physicochemical properties, metadata node names, and PDB availability. The filtering module supports complex queries with AND/OR/NOT operators. Aguilera-Mendoza et al. (2019) provided a detailed explanation of this module, and further information is available in the online documentation of the software (https://grupo-medicina-molecular-y-traslacional.github.io/StarPep_doc/networks.html). In addition, specific use cases have been reported by Ayala-Ruano et al. (2022), Romero et al. (2022), Castillo-Mendieta et al. (2023), and Agüero-Chapin et al. (2023). StarPep toolbox integrates an option to compute protein/peptide sequence-based MDs. These MDs are calculated by applying statistical (e.g. measures of central tendency, and statistical dispersion), fuzzy (e.g. Choquet integral), and non-fuzzy (e.g. GOWAWA) aggregation operators on physicochemical amino acid properties (e.g. net charge, isoelectric point, molecular weight, etc.) [see SI1–4 in Aguilera-Mendoza et al. (2020)]. The proposed workflow in the StarPep toolbox takes peptide sequences as input to project all these n compounds into an m-dimensional space of hundreds of MDs. These sequence-based MDs showed better behavior (Aguilera-Mendoza et al. 2020) than the iFeature software (Chen et al. 2018). In this module, the set of initially calculated MDs can be reduced to find an optimized subset by applying a two-stage unsupervised feature selection pipeline, which is based on entropy and mutual information concepts (Aguilera-Mendoza et al. 2020). The optimized sets of MDs enable the computation of similarity indices, perform clustering analysis, and create correlation networks of AMPs; as explained in the next section. The MDs can be employed within the StarPep toolbox, or alternatively, exported as CSV files for external usage in various tasks, including the development of predictive models using machine-learning techniques. Thus, StarPep toolbox is a new software for calculating peptide/protein features that generalize most of the sequence indices families proposed to date. StarPep toolbox supports the creation of three types of networks: (i) metadata (METNs), (ii) chemical space (CSNs), and (iii) half-space proximal (HSPNs). METNs are knowledge graphs where the edges represent semantic relationships (e.g. “is a,” “produced by,” “compiled in,” etc.) between the AMPs and their metadata [see Fig. 1 in Aguilera-Mendoza et al. (2019)]. CSNs and HSPNs are correlation and weighted networks, where the weights are the similarity values, and two nodes are connected by an edge if the similarity coefficient is greater than or equal to a given cutoff. The software provides different metrics to define the similarity between AMPs (Euclidean, Manhattan, Chebyshev, Camberra, Soergel, Bhattacharyya, Angular separation, and Wave-edge distances). A recent study found that the selection of similarity metrics for the construction of hemolytic peptide networks significantly affected the results (Castillo-Mendieta et al. 2023). CSNs and HSPNs differ in their building methods, with CSNs typically having more edges than HSPNs (Aguilera-Mendoza et al. 2020). HSPNs have been demonstrated to yield better outcomes than CSNs in prior research (Ayala-Ruano et al. 2022, Romero et al. 2022). This finding could be attributed to the fact that HSPNs are constructed without searching for an optimal similarity threshold, as they rely on the application of the half-space proximal test (Chavez et al. 2006). After creating the similarity networks, the software provides global properties (e.g. density, modularity, etc.) and calculates centrality measures (weighted degree, betweenness, harmonic, and hub-bridge) that give a notion of the importance of nodes (peptides) in a complex network. Moreover, the program includes community detection algorithms (modularity optimization, hierarchical, k-means, expectation–maximization, and Uclust), for detecting potential AMPs families with similar MD profiles. Zooming into the detected clusters helps to identify central nodes representing relevant AMPs within communities. Moreover, the clustering analysis offers the possibility of identifying singleton (atypical) nodes, representing isolated peptides with distinct characteristics from the grouped ones. These important nodes facilitate the identification of shared motifs among potential AMP families organized into distinct communities. Previous research identified such motifs for different AMPs, including antiparasitic (Ayala-Ruano et al. 2022), tumor-homing (Romero et al. 2022), hemolytic (Castillo-Mendieta et al. 2023), and antibiofilm peptides (Agüero-Chapin et al. 2023). In addition, these nodes serve as the basis for the subsequent creation of mQSSMs, as detailed in the next section. There are also options to get a non-redundant set of nodes based on a centrality measure. This can be carried out by using the scaffold extraction plugin and calculating the shortest path between two nodes with the shortest path plugin. The software presents an additional feature that enables the overlapping of external sequences onto a network, finding the k-nearest neighbors and facilitating the prediction of novel activities leveraging the information from the neighborhood. The visualization of networks can be customized by changing the color and size of nodes according to node-level parameters (e.g. centrality measures, communities, etc.), or by applying different layouts that spatialize and rearrange nodes. Furthermore, the networks can be represented with the principal components, which are linear combinations of the MDs calculated with the software. The online documentation of the software presents a comprehensive description of most of the features from this section. After applying centrality measures and community detection algorithms in the CSNs and HSPNs, the software gives a representative and non-redundant set of AMPs. These AMPs comprise the most important nodes by each community and the singletons, representing a sample of the whole chemical space. This set can be the input to carry out multi-query similarity searches against the StarPepDB [see Fig. 7 in Agüero-Chapin et al. (2022)]. The mQSSMs are untrained one-class models that do not require datasets for non-AMPs, which is an advantage because these negatively labeled datasets are normally created artificially and reduce the classification capacity of the algorithms (Sidorczuk et al. 2022). The mQSSMs can lead to the repurposing of AMPs with novel functional activities. Prior research has demonstrated that mQSSMs can outperform state-of-the-art methods for predicting antiparasitic (Ayala-Ruano et al. 2022) and tumor-homing peptides (Romero et al. 2022). StarPep toolbox allows users to retrieve a subset of AMPs from the StarPepDB using their metadata (function, target pathogen, biological origin, chemical modifications, original database, and cross-referenced entries to Protein Data Bank, PubMed, and UniProt). It is also possible to find AMPs that share a given sequence identity above a threshold with single or multiple queries from the StarPepDB or an external sequence. Moreover, the software can create a non-redundant set of AMPs where any pair of sequences share no more than a given threshold of sequence identity. The user can choose the parameters to calculate the sequence identity (i.e. global, or local alignment algorithm, the substitution matrix, etc.). Finally, the software enables filtering out AMPs from the StarPepDB by peptide attributes (sequence or length), physicochemical properties, metadata node names, and PDB availability. The filtering module supports complex queries with AND/OR/NOT operators. Aguilera-Mendoza et al. (2019) provided a detailed explanation of this module, and further information is available in the online documentation of the software (https://grupo-medicina-molecular-y-traslacional.github.io/StarPep_doc/networks.html). In addition, specific use cases have been reported by Ayala-Ruano et al. (2022), Romero et al. (2022), Castillo-Mendieta et al. (2023), and Agüero-Chapin et al. (2023). StarPep toolbox integrates an option to compute protein/peptide sequence-based MDs. These MDs are calculated by applying statistical (e.g. measures of central tendency, and statistical dispersion), fuzzy (e.g. Choquet integral), and non-fuzzy (e.g. GOWAWA) aggregation operators on physicochemical amino acid properties (e.g. net charge, isoelectric point, molecular weight, etc.) [see SI1–4 in Aguilera-Mendoza et al. (2020)]. The proposed workflow in the StarPep toolbox takes peptide sequences as input to project all these n compounds into an m-dimensional space of hundreds of MDs. These sequence-based MDs showed better behavior (Aguilera-Mendoza et al. 2020) than the iFeature software (Chen et al. 2018). In this module, the set of initially calculated MDs can be reduced to find an optimized subset by applying a two-stage unsupervised feature selection pipeline, which is based on entropy and mutual information concepts (Aguilera-Mendoza et al. 2020). The optimized sets of MDs enable the computation of similarity indices, perform clustering analysis, and create correlation networks of AMPs; as explained in the next section. The MDs can be employed within the StarPep toolbox, or alternatively, exported as CSV files for external usage in various tasks, including the development of predictive models using machine-learning techniques. Thus, StarPep toolbox is a new software for calculating peptide/protein features that generalize most of the sequence indices families proposed to date. StarPep toolbox supports the creation of three types of networks: (i) metadata (METNs), (ii) chemical space (CSNs), and (iii) half-space proximal (HSPNs). METNs are knowledge graphs where the edges represent semantic relationships (e.g. “is a,” “produced by,” “compiled in,” etc.) between the AMPs and their metadata [see Fig. 1 in Aguilera-Mendoza et al. (2019)]. CSNs and HSPNs are correlation and weighted networks, where the weights are the similarity values, and two nodes are connected by an edge if the similarity coefficient is greater than or equal to a given cutoff. The software provides different metrics to define the similarity between AMPs (Euclidean, Manhattan, Chebyshev, Camberra, Soergel, Bhattacharyya, Angular separation, and Wave-edge distances). A recent study found that the selection of similarity metrics for the construction of hemolytic peptide networks significantly affected the results (Castillo-Mendieta et al. 2023). CSNs and HSPNs differ in their building methods, with CSNs typically having more edges than HSPNs (Aguilera-Mendoza et al. 2020). HSPNs have been demonstrated to yield better outcomes than CSNs in prior research (Ayala-Ruano et al. 2022, Romero et al. 2022). This finding could be attributed to the fact that HSPNs are constructed without searching for an optimal similarity threshold, as they rely on the application of the half-space proximal test (Chavez et al. 2006). After creating the similarity networks, the software provides global properties (e.g. density, modularity, etc.) and calculates centrality measures (weighted degree, betweenness, harmonic, and hub-bridge) that give a notion of the importance of nodes (peptides) in a complex network. Moreover, the program includes community detection algorithms (modularity optimization, hierarchical, k-means, expectation–maximization, and Uclust), for detecting potential AMPs families with similar MD profiles. Zooming into the detected clusters helps to identify central nodes representing relevant AMPs within communities. Moreover, the clustering analysis offers the possibility of identifying singleton (atypical) nodes, representing isolated peptides with distinct characteristics from the grouped ones. These important nodes facilitate the identification of shared motifs among potential AMP families organized into distinct communities. Previous research identified such motifs for different AMPs, including antiparasitic (Ayala-Ruano et al. 2022), tumor-homing (Romero et al. 2022), hemolytic (Castillo-Mendieta et al. 2023), and antibiofilm peptides (Agüero-Chapin et al. 2023). In addition, these nodes serve as the basis for the subsequent creation of mQSSMs, as detailed in the next section. There are also options to get a non-redundant set of nodes based on a centrality measure. This can be carried out by using the scaffold extraction plugin and calculating the shortest path between two nodes with the shortest path plugin. The software presents an additional feature that enables the overlapping of external sequences onto a network, finding the k-nearest neighbors and facilitating the prediction of novel activities leveraging the information from the neighborhood. The visualization of networks can be customized by changing the color and size of nodes according to node-level parameters (e.g. centrality measures, communities, etc.), or by applying different layouts that spatialize and rearrange nodes. Furthermore, the networks can be represented with the principal components, which are linear combinations of the MDs calculated with the software. The online documentation of the software presents a comprehensive description of most of the features from this section. After applying centrality measures and community detection algorithms in the CSNs and HSPNs, the software gives a representative and non-redundant set of AMPs. These AMPs comprise the most important nodes by each community and the singletons, representing a sample of the whole chemical space. This set can be the input to carry out multi-query similarity searches against the StarPepDB [see Fig. 7 in Agüero-Chapin et al. (2022)]. The mQSSMs are untrained one-class models that do not require datasets for non-AMPs, which is an advantage because these negatively labeled datasets are normally created artificially and reduce the classification capacity of the algorithms (Sidorczuk et al. 2022). The mQSSMs can lead to the repurposing of AMPs with novel functional activities. Prior research has demonstrated that mQSSMs can outperform state-of-the-art methods for predicting antiparasitic (Ayala-Ruano et al. 2022) and tumor-homing peptides (Romero et al. 2022). StarPep toolbox is an open-source desktop application developed in Java, using Java Development Kit (JDK) 8 and integrating functionalities from other Java-based open-source projects. For instance, the graphical user interface was built on top of Gephi (Bastian et al. 2009), which in turn is based on the NetBeans Platform (https://platform.netbeans.org/). The graph database structure was implemented in Neo4j (https://neo4j.com/). The visualization engine and some network-based metrics and methods were imported from Gephi (Bastian et al. 2009). The sequence alignment algorithms were implemented using BioJava (Lafita et al. 2019). The 3D structures attached to peptide nodes (PDB metadata) may be displayed inside the software tool by using Jmol (http://www.jmol.org/). StarPep toolbox is an open-source and user-friendly software to explore the AMP chemical space by querying, filtering, visualizing, and analyzing network-based representations. This application opens many possibilities for peptide drug repurposing, design, and optimization. We plan to add new functionalities to the software, such as new centrality metrics, more global and node-specific network properties, a module for structural motifs searching, and a web version of the StarPepDB with some tools of the software. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This work was supported in part by Grant 2021-22 [Projects ID17601 and ID17886 to Y.M.-P.] from Universidad San Francisco de Quito (USFQ); and by the Consejo Nacional de Humanidades, Ciencias y Tecnología (CONAHCYT) [grant numbers A1-S-20638 to C.A.B., 320658 to C.R.G.-J.]. The StarPep toolbox software and the installation files are freely available at https://github.com/Grupo-Medicina-Molecular-y-Traslacional/StarPep and the online documentation at https://grupo-medicina-molecular-y-traslacional.github.io/StarPep_doc.