Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are gene-encoded host defense effector molecules of innate immunity that play a critical role in avoiding microbial infection in plants and animals. The lasting potency of AMPs has inspired the development of a new generation of antibiotics to combat drug-resistant pathogens, including Gram-negative bacteria, tuberculosis (TB), human immunodeficiency immune virus (HIV), and malaria [1–5]. The discovery of AMPs may be split into four phases [6]: (i) the early phase (1922–1979) started with the discovery of lysozyme [7]; (ii) the golden phase (1980–2002) was characterized by the isolation and purification of numerous classic peptides (e.g. cecropins, defensins, and magainins) from natural sources [1, 8–11]; (iii) the omics phase (2003–2020) was heralded by the completion of the sequencing of the human genome in 2003 (https://www.genome.gov/25520492/online-education-kit-2003-human-genome-project-completed) and led to the rapid identification of hundreds of potential AMPs via sequence alignment from a single organism [12, 13]; and (iv) the artificial intelligence (AI) phase (2021–present) began with the successful prediction of protein structures by AlphaFold in 2021 [14]. The use of AI has further accelerated the discovery scale of potential AMPs from sequenced genomes and microbiota, leading to the identification of millions of sequences [15–21]. While AlphaFold [14] was trained based on the abundant experimentally determined structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) [22], the AI prediction of AMPs [15–21] was initially and frequently conducted based on the natural AMPs in the antimicrobial peptide database (APD) [23]. More recent AI predictions could have been made based on the hypothetical negative dataset downloaded from UniProt [24] and the merged positive datasets from the APD and other databases with more synthetic peptides [25–28]. The original APD included peptide search, prediction, design, and statistics interfaces [23]. Subsequently, peptide classes, posttranslational modifications, and mechanism of action (MOA) were included in the APD2 [29]. These database features were matured in the APD3 [30]. While the APD continued to evolve by inserting new features (Supplementary Table S1), CAMP expanded antimicrobial protein size beyond 200 residues and programmed machine learning predictors [25]. DBAASP uploaded simulated peptides and provided detailed antibacterial conditions (e.g. medium and pH) for additional synthetic peptides [26]. It is notable that DRAMP collected stapled peptides with therapeutic potential [27]. In addition, dbAMP3 provided predicted structural models and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) transporter docking for AMPs [28]. More related databases can be visited via the extensively updated database links included in the antimicrobial peptide database version 6 (APD6). Since the biological functions of AMPs are not limited to their role in protecting against microbes, we also built a wheel of peptide functions into the APD [23]. This wheel records a variety of biological activities or functions of AMPs (e.g. antiviral, antidiabetic, and insecticidal) [1–12]. Nineteen such functions were included in the APD3 [30]. Both peptide entries and functions continued to increase in the APD4 [31] and APD5 [32]. These peptide functions served as the first filter in developing the database filtering technology [33] for designing novel peptides with activity against bacteria, fungi, and viruses [33–36]. While the current AI predictions are limited to the early stages of peptide development (e.g. activity or hemolysis), additional information is absent for developing intermediate (e.g. antimicrobial robustness) and late stages predictors for in vivo toxicity and efficacy (see the Graphical abstract). To facilitate future development, we constructed a novel information pipeline for AMPs in the APD. Our deployment of this information pipeline was inspired by the database filtering technology [29, 33] and the success in adding in vitro and in vivo filters [37]. Our in vitro filtering aimed to overcome the major hurdles (e.g. pH, salt, and serum effects) that could compromise peptide activity [38, 39]. We identified such peptide candidates experimentally by screening a library of synthetic peptides against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Remarkably, the database-designed peptides showed systemic efficacy in neutropenic mice [37]. We reasoned that our registration of such data in the APD could facilitate the discovery of effective peptides in silico. Although some elements of the antimicrobial peptide information pipeline (AMPIP), such as animal models, were described in our reports concerning the APD4 [31] and APD5 [32], this is the first report in which we describe the AMPIP. Our bioinformatic comparisons confirmed the uniqueness of the newly annotated positive and negative datasets, implying their usefulness in peptide design and prediction. Since we have refined the peptide datasets, the APD6 also provides an updated view on natural AMPs and documents new findings. The APD6 provided the first systematic classification of synthetic and predicted peptides. Such a systematic classification system still does not exist in other databases [25–28]. Here, we describe three aspects of the reconfigured APD6: (i) the consolidated database platform, (ii) the expanded wheel of function, and (iii) the innovative peptide information pipeline. The APD is an original resource initially constructed using the LAMP set of freeware, including Linux, Apache web server, MySQL, and PHP script language [23]. Recently, the database has been reprogrammed and upgraded to PHP7 and MariaDB 10.5 to strengthen cybersecurity, and all the web pages have been unified to the web style of the University of Nebraska Medical Center (UNMC) [32]. Peptide search was detailed in the description of APD version 1 [23]. The search for peptides utilized PubMed, PDB, and Swiss-Prot (UniProt). Starting with version 2, we also used Google Scholar. During the preparation of the APD6, we found AI-assisted web search is also helpful in locating the sequence and activity information for PXL01. All peptide functions in Supplementary Table S2 and all the key peptide features covered in the information pipeline below were utilized for literature search. Peptides will be registered into the APD if they satisfy the following criteria: (i) natural, synthetic, or predicted AMPs, (ii) known amino acid (aa) sequence, (iii) peptide activity determined, and (iv) peptide size <200 aa [30]. A new peptide sequence will be compared with the database by using the calculation and prediction interface [23]. If a record for the identical peptide already exists, new information will be merged with the existing entry. Natural AMPs with the same sequence can be searched using “found in multiple species” via the database field of Additional Information (Add Info, 135 entries). The APD previously programmed a powerful database search engine. The results of each database search can be sorted based on database ID, peptide length, net charge, or hydrophobic content. In addition, statistical analyses for all or a partial list of peptides from database search, including amino acid composition, average length, and net charge, can be conducted in the APD. Hydrophobic ratio (Pho) of a peptide can be calculated by dividing the number of the hydrophobic amino acids (I, V, L, F, C, M, A, and W) by the peptide length [23]. Despite our previous focus on natural AMPs, the original APD and subsequent versions covered natural (e.g. AP00001), synthetic (e.g. AP00029), and predicted (e.g. AP00281) peptides [23, 29, 30]. The APD6 has been reconfigured, enabling the expansion of all three groups of peptides. As of 18 March 2025, the APD6 contained a total of 5188 entries, including 3306 “natural AMPs,” 1380 “synthetic AMPs,” and 239 “predicted AMPs” (Fig. 1A). Each group of peptides can be searched using the quoted words in the “name” field. A search of “AMPs” alone retrieved the records for all peptides with demonstrated antimicrobial activity (4928 entries). Compared to the APD5 [32], 1915 peptides have been inserted, including 418 natural, 196 predicted, and 1301 synthetic peptides. Comparison of 3306 natural, 1380 synthetic, and 239 predicted AMPs in the APD6. (A) Current percentages of natural, predicted, and synthetic AMPs. Others include peptides without antimicrobial activity. (B) Amino acid signatures of natural, predicted, and synthetic AMPs. (C) Net charge, hydrophobic content, and length of natural, predicted, and synthetic AMPs. Data obtained from the APD6 at https://aps.unmc.edu. Our systematic classification of natural AMPs commenced in the APD2 [29] and completed in the APD3 [30]. Natural AMPs are classified based on the following properties: peptide source (kingdom and geographic region), biosynthetic machinery, amino acid sequence, chain number, chemical modification, structure, peptide bonding patterns, activity, and MOA [30]. These classifications have been updated recently [40]. Synthetic AMPs are made in laboratories investigating the structure–activity relationship (SAR) or seeking to increase peptide therapeutic potential (e.g. high activity and low toxicity). Recently, Link and colleagues made 90 000 peptide variants based on a single lasso template of ubonodin [41]. Because the number of possible synthetic peptides is unlimited and currently studied peptides are biased toward popular templates, only optimized synthetic peptides from each study were initially added to the APD to reduce sequence redundancy [6]. Later the decision was made to add representative synthetic peptides to the APD6. This change facilitated the establishment of a systematic classification scheme. Synthetic peptides may be obtained from (i) “library screen” or (ii) designed by different labs. Peptides designed based on natural templates are grouped under “natural derivative”. They can be obtained via (i) “amino acid substitution” (770 entries), (ii) “amino acid deletion” (36 entries), (iii) “sequence truncation” (195 entries), and (iv) “sequence extension” by a few residues (20 entries). A peptide template may be “animal-derived” (currently 605 entries), “plant-derived” (17 entries), “fungi-derived” (43 entries), or “bacteria-derived” (212 entries). In the APD6, the word “designed” refers to peptides with nonnatural sequences, which may be obtained via (i) “sequence shuffling” (152 entries), (ii) “hybrid peptide” (69 entries), (iii) “de novo designed” (124 entries), and (iv) “peptide conjugates” (19 entries). Peptide conjugates can contain a pathogen-targeting sequence, cell-penetration motifs, and even non-peptide moieties. All the quoted synthetic groups above can be searched in the “Source organism” field of the APD6. The establishment of a classification scheme for synthetic peptides makes it easier for researchers in the AMP field to retrieve a group of peptides of interest. It may also enable the generation of a defined set of synthetic peptides to test the prediction accuracy of AI models. The goal of prediction is to identify potential AMP sequences in the genomes using in silico methods based on the known sequence features of AMPs, such as high positive charge (APD web site), γ-motif, or disulfide bond patterns [42, 43]. This can also be accomplished reliably based on sequence alignment. In the AI age, an independent group for predicted AMPs with antimicrobial activity validated has been added to the APD6 [6]. At present, these peptides are split into two groups: “AI predicted” (180 annotated) and “other methods predicted” (18 assigned). Again, the quoted words can be searched in the Source field, which can also include biological sources of predicted peptides when reported. Unlike synthetic or predicted peptides with unlimited numbers, nature makes each peptide with a purpose, leading to a defined number of natural AMPs from the six life kingdoms. Therefore, when we ask about the total AMPs discovered to date, we mean “natural AMPs.” Figure 1B compares average amino acid compositions of natural, synthetic, and predicted AMPs in the APD6. Amino acids W, R, and K are most abundant in synthetic AMPs, but lowest in natural AMPs. In contrast, residues P, T, S, Q, N, E, and H are lowest in synthetic AMPs, but highest in natural AMPs. Since peptide prediction was made based on natural and synthetic sequences, it is not surprising that the amino acid contents of AI predicted AMPs may fall between those of natural and synthetic AMPs. Based on our further classification of synthetic peptides, the “designed” group was found to have the highest percentages for amino acids L, W, K, and R and lowest percentages for C, A, G, P, Y, Q, N, E, D, and H, indicative of a preferred use of L, W, K, and R in designing novel sequences (Supplementary Fig. S1). Hence, the majority of these synthetic peptides were made by following the classic amphipathic concept [1, 2, 6]. Evidently, natural AMPs form the basis for generating both synthetic and predicted peptides by increasing amino acids L, F, W, K, and R, and decreasing C, A, G, P, T, S, Q, N, E, D, and H (Fig. 1B). We then compared the distribution of net charge, hydrophobic ratio, and length of natural, predicted, and synthetic AMPs (Fig. 1C). While the peak hydrophobic ratios (Pho 31%–50%) remained similar, the hydrophobic profile of predicted AMPs more resembled that of natural peptides. Also, the majority of peptides in all the three groups had an averaged net charge in the range of +1 to +10. However, both synthetic and predicted groups possessed higher ratios between the +6 - +10 peptide group and the +1 - +5 peptide group. By considering synthesis cost, both synthetic and predicted peptides are tilted toward shorter peptides (11–20 residues), while the peak length range of the known natural AMPs is located between 21–30 residues. Since natural AMPs have been updated (Supplementary Table S1) and refined by excluding those without activity proof, it is useful to provide a current view on natural AMPs. Natural AMPs possess a biased amino acid composition with abundant L, A, G, and K (Fig. 1B). Although the majority of the peptides are cationic with a net charge in the range of +1 to +5, the upper limit for net charge has increased from +30 to +57 due to the inclusion of a histone H1 protein from Atlantic salmon [44]. The lower limit for net charge, −12, remains the same [30]. Most of natural peptides are 11–50 residues long with a hydrophobic content of 31%–50% (Fig. 1C). Our database analysis revealed that natural AMPs (<100 aa), which have an average hydrophobic ratio (Pho) of 42.5% and a net charge +3.8, are rather distinct from antimicrobial proteins (>100 aa), which are less hydrophobic (Pho 32.3%) but more cationic (+6.5). Structurally, AMPs fall into four unified classes: α, β, αβ, and non-αβ (Fig. 2A) [30]. The majority of natural AMPs are composed of single polypeptide chains. However, some AMPs consist of two or more chains. A search of “two-chain” and “natural AMPs” in the name field returned 55 peptides, consisting of 35 bacteriocins and 20 animal AMPs. Also, the two chains of animal AMPs are disulfide-linked and may be identical or different (search with “homodimer” or “heterodimer”). AMPs with two or more sequence domains (e.g. Cys-rich and Pro-rich) [4] can be searched using “modular design” (22 entries). Natural AMPs have been discovered in six life kingdoms: bacteria, archaea, protists, fungi, plants, and animals [30]. Figure 2B depicts the annual increase in the total bacterial, plant, and animal AMPs. Evidently, animals (76%) remain the dominant source for natural AMPs, followed by bacteria (12%) and plants (11%) (Fig. 2C). Animal peptides are further split into vertebrate and invertebrate AMPs, each consisting of multiple classes (Table 1). Insects have the highest number of known AMPs among invertebrates, whereas amphibians possess the highest number of known AMPs among vertebrates. In fact, amphibian AMPs (1111 entries with activity) account for 33.5% of natural AMPs with known antimicrobial activity. Natural AMPs may be posttranslationally modified (45% in the APD6). The count of chemically modified AMPs (29 types in Fig. 2D) and their search modes are documented in Table 2. The most common posttranslational modifications are disulfide bonding (39%), C-terminal amidation (20%), and Rana box formation (14%). The APD6 identified peptide examples for three types of additional chemical modifications (nitration, succinylation, and carboxymethylation). Landscape of natural AMPs in the APD6. (A) Four structural classes. (B) Growth of AMPs from bacteria, plants, and animals for two decades. (C) Percent of natural AMPs from the six life kingdoms. (D) Count of 29 types of chemically modified AMPs. (E) Plots of counts of the string of 2, 3, and 4 same amino acids. (F) Longest string of the same amino acid. (G) Growth of peptide functions in the APD. (H) and (I) Natural peptide counts with different activities in the APD. Natural AMPs from different kingdoms and classes in the APD aAs of March 2025. Total peptides in the APD, including 206 natural candidates with unknown antimicrobial activity. Posttranslational modifications of AMPs in the APDa aThe chemical modification search system was enabled in the APD2 [29]. All can be searched via the name field of the database using the XX code shown in this table. The only exception is disulfide-linked peptides, which can be searched using S=S in the name field. In addition, the number of disulfide bonds in the peptides can be searched by placing an arabic number in front. For instance, we obtained 558 and 433 natural AMPs with 1 and 3 disulfide bonds, respectively as of 27 March 2025. Up to three types of modifications can be searched simultaneously. For the 2025 data, counts for natural AMPs are given in parenthesis. We initially defined residues L, A, G, and K as frequently occurring amino acids (>10%) in amphibian AMPs [29]. When searched in pairs (e.g. AA and LL), these amino acids remain abundant (Fig. 2E). Moving to triplets (e.g. AAA) and quartets (e.g. AAAA), L and K dropped rapidly. We then tried to identify the longest amino acid string for each amino acid in natural AMPs (Fig. 2F). Glycine formed the longest string with 10 residues (GGGGGGGGGG), followed by A and P with 9 residues. While charged residues D, E, K, and R are clustered in the plot and formed 5–7 residue strings, hydrophobic amino acids, including I, V, F, C, and W, never passed three in a row (e.g. WWW). Four leucines (LLLL) or more were only found in two antimicrobial proteins. Such natural amino acid combinations may be applied to peptide design. For instance, verine [45] became much less hemolytic when WWWW was altered to the natural triplet WWW. AMPs can possess functions beyond antimicrobial activity [1, 2, 7]. The APD database started to include this information in 2003 [23]. Supplementary Table S2 documents a list of reported peptide activities added to each version of the APD in the past two decades. The growth of total peptide functions in the APD can be viewed in Fig. 2G. Another 7 functions were inserted into the APD6, bringing the current total to 32. These include 13 “bacteria-agglutinating” peptides (replacing the previous two-chain peptide icon), 9 “nematocidal” peptides (replacing the previous “surface immobilized peptides”), 20 “cell-penetrating” AMPs, 13 “proinflammatory” AMPs, 3 “sleep”-related peptides, 84 “anti-VRE” (vancomycin-resistant enterococcus) AMPs, and 17 “amyloid AMPs.” The quoted words can be directly searched in Add Info. Supplementary Table S2 summarizes search methods for all searchable functions accumulated to date. Antibacterial peptides constitute the largest group, followed by antifungal AMPs (Fig. 2H). For clarity, peptide functions with <100 counts are plotted in Fig. 2I. The amino acid profiles of natural AMPs for each peptide function can vary depending on the targeted organism or desired peptide function [31]. We previously found the highest arginine content for antiviral peptides, and this observation was successfully utilized to enhance peptide anti-HIV activity [46]. The use of the wheel of function in designing antibacterial, antiviral, and antifungal peptides has been demonstrated [33–36]. In the APD6, some peptide activities can be searched at multiple levels. While the term “antimicrobial” covers antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, and antiparasitic activities, antibacterial peptides were split into anti-Gram+ and anti-Gram− in 2008 [29]. One can also search for a set of peptides against MRSA, TB, and VRE. In addition, many more specific bacterial pathogen species can be searched in the Add Info field [30]. For instance, searches of E. coli, S. aureus, and P. aeruginosa returned 2925, 2726, and 1392 AMPs against these pathogens, respectively. One should be cautious with such species-specific activity datasets. Since numerous peptides in the datasets can have a wide spectrum of activity, creation of organism-specific peptides is not warranted. Antimicrobial development in silico requires a variety of information relevant to preclinical and/or clinical studies (Fig. 3A). To store such information, we explored the use of the Add Info field in the APD [23]. A brief evolution of the information content in this field is depicted in Supplementary Fig. S2. This field started to expand after 2012. Recently, we organized this information systematically into a pipeline and reformatted it for clarity by making the subtitle bold. The available information scope is peptide dependent. A comprehensive example is shown in Supplementary Scheme S1 for human cathelicidin LL-37 (AP00301). We also enabled multilevel searches separated by colon (see below). In the following, we briefly describe the new peptide information in the AMPIP edited to date. All the headings below can be searched in Add Info. Antimicrobial peptide information pipeline and findings. (A) The original APD database platform is surrounded by wheel of function: G, antibacterial; V, antiviral; F, antifungal; P, antiparasitic; I, insecticidal; C, anticancer; D, antimalarial; W, wound healing; and S, spermicidal (see Supplementary Table S2 for other peptide activities). Amino acid comparison of the two peptide groups active and inactive against E. coli (B) and S. aureus (C). Amino acid comparison of the two peptides groups sensitive and insensitive to pH changes (D) or with and without bacterial resistance development (E). (F) Animal models used for efficacy test of AMPs in vivo. (G) Summary of recombinant production of AMPs. This field emphasizes important biological functions (sleep, fur color, sperm fertilization) as well as connections with human diseases (infectious, Alzheimer, cancer, and diabetic) (Supplementary Fig. S3). This section is reserved for host expression of AMPs, which can be induced or constitutive. When available, the signal pathways (e.g. imd and toll) for peptide expression [47] are also documented. We have enabled the search of additional details for discovery in the “Source” field: leaves, stem, roots, and seeds for plants, and neutrophils, T cells, venom, airway, skin, and lung for animals. A search of “skin” resulted in 448 peptides, whereas a search of “venom” gave 189 peptides. In the case of bacteriocins, this information block can include the biological machinery for expressing, processing, transporting, and even self-immunity [48]. Since posttranslational modification may affect peptide properties, the annotations including this information were added to the APD starting 2008 [29]. Table 2 documents the current 29 types of chemical modifications and peptide counts. Add Info provides more modification details for over 500 entries. In the APD6, “peptide engineering” is reserved for human-made peptides with nonstandard amino acids (e.g. d-amino acids and biphenylalanine) or nonstandard chemical bonds (i.e. stapled peptides) to enhance stability to proteases. Biomedical devices are widely utilized to improve life quality. One potential problem is microbial contamination, followed by formation of difficult-to-remove biofilms. Immobilizing AMPs on the surface of medical devices and implants may prevent bacterial colonization and biofilm formation [49]. “Surface immobilized peptides” have been relocated into the information pipeline and can be searched via Add Info (33 entries). The APD6 recorded 4237 antibacterial peptides with known activity measured by various experimental methods, including diffusion assays, the microdilution method, bacterial killing, and even OD differences [23]. Based on minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC), AMPs are classified into active (MIC < 100 μM) and inactive (MIC > 100 μM) groups [6, 30]. Active and inactive peptides against E. coli can be searched using “E. coli” (2669 entries) and “E.coli” (349 entries), respectively. We observed higher contents of basic K and R but lower levels of hydrophobic I, L, F, and A for E. coli-active peptides (Fig. 3B). The same trend was observed for active and inactive peptides against K. pneumoniae (Supplementary Fig. S4A) and P. aeruginosa (Supplementary Fig. S4B). In contrast, L is higher in AMPs active against Gram-positive S. aureus, whereas K is lower (Fig. 3C). To handle a large number of bacterial clinical strains used in antimicrobial susceptibility assays for the same peptide, we grouped similar MIC values into a range (e.g. 8–32 μM) and indicated the number of strains tested. Any MIC out of the range (e.g. >100 μM) will be recorded separately. Importantly, the APD provides warning messages for various reasons such as “nonstandard assay” conditions (67 entries) and “other bacteria not tested” (182 entries). While nonstandard assays using less media tend to give lower MIC values, limited bacteria testing may be insufficient to define bacteria activity spectrum (e.g. Gram types). These unique annotations will aid in noise filtering for AI prediction with improved accuracy. The word “robustness” means that a peptide retains its activity under various conditions (e.g. salts, pH, and serum). This information has been edited for over 300 peptides. A general search format of salt-sensitive or -insensitive AMPs was reported previously [6]. The APD6 has advanced this search. A search of “NaCl-sensitive:E. coli” produced 47 entries with activity sensitive to NaCl when tested using E. coli. A peptide is annotated as sensitive if its MIC has changed ≥4-fold. Similarly, the “NaCl-insensitive:E. coli” search retrieved 56 entries. In addition, we found 10 entries for “CaCl2-sensitive:S. aureus.” Likewise, the APD6 includes pH effects on peptide activity. A comparison of the pH-sensitive and -insensitive groups (Fig. 3D) revealed that the “pH-sensitive” group possessed impressive levels of C and R amino acids, due to the presence of multiple defensins [50]. In contrast, the “pH-insensitive” group had higher I, L, M, A, P, Y, Q, N, and K, implying helical peptides. Other factors such as sensitivity to human serum are also annotated here. We found 24 “serum-sensitive” and 16 “serum-insensitive” AMPs. Their amino acid profiles are plotted in Supplementary Fig. S5. Synergy between natural AMPs provides another layer of host protection and slows down resistance development [1, 2, 5]. Synergistic effects between AMPs were first annotated in the APD2 [29]. We obtained 45 peptides when we searched the name field with JJsn. The APD6 covers not only inter-peptide synergy but also synergy with other agents such as antibiotics and antibodies. A search of “synergy:antibiotic” in Add Info led to 21 peptides. It is remarkably difficult for bacteria to develop resistance to cationic AMPs as these peptides cause membrane disruption [1]. However, bacterial resistance development, usually based on multiple passage experiments, has been reported. To provide insight into resistance development, the APD6 has classified AMPs into two searchable groups: “resistance development:yes” (16 entries) and “resistance development:no” (43 entries). One can also search the microbial types that developed resistance using “resistance development:yes:bacteria:E. coli” (5 entries). Likewise, fungal resistance can be searched by replacing “bacteria” with “fungi,” followed by a defined fungal organism. Figure 3E compares two groups of AMPs with and without bacterial resistance. On average, the 16 AMPs with recorded resistance had a lower hydrophobic ratio (Pho 34.8%) than those without resistance (Pho 44.2%). Interestingly, those with resistance development had high percentages of P (11.9%) and R (20%). In contrast, no resistant AMPs possessed higher L (11.9%) and K (18.7%) (Fig. 3E). Such amino acid compositions are remarkably different. The former implies the presence of Pro-rich AMPs, while the latter points at classic amphipathic helical peptides known to target membranes. This finding suggests that the tendency for bacteria to develop resistance depends on peptide class. “Resistance mechanism” is also included (18 entries) if such information is elucidated. Natural AMPs can target anionic bacterial membranes [1, 2], cell wall, DNA, and ribosomes (Supplementary Fig. S6). We initially documented this information in the APD2 (search using the BB code in the name field; Table 3). For instance, BBMm means membrane targeting, while BBN indicates DNA binding. The same activity for d- and l-forms of the same peptide is frequently used to support membrane targeting (search with D = L, 28 entries edited). The d-form consisting of all d-amino acids is a mirror image of the same peptide (l-form) made of normal l-amino acids. BBribo denotes a ribosome inhibitory peptide. Nature has designed different structures for different molecular targets. While amphipathic α-helices act on bacterial membranes, proline-rich AMPs with an extended structure (a type of non-αβ structure) bind to bacterial ribosomes. Add Info in the APD6 provides further details. We have annotated 238 entries for MOA:bacteria and 39 peptides for MOA:fungi. APD statistics for binding partners/molecular targets of AMPsa aData obtained from the updated APD (https://aps.unmc.edu). The APD6 contains records for 532 α-helical, 98 β-sheet, 108 αβ, and 30 non-αβ 3D structures for natural AMPs. Of 528 AMPs with 3D structures, 88% were determined by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Also included are helical structures demonstrated by circular dichroism (CD). In the APD6, AMPs with structures determined by both NMR and X-ray diffraction methods can be searched using “NMR + X” (13 cases). One can also search membrane-mimetic models using “TFE” (484 entries), “SDS” (314 entries), “DPC” (95 entries), “D8PG” (6 entries), and “lipid bilayers” (12 entries). Clearly, trifluoroethanol (TFE), sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and dodecylphosphocholine (DPC) are commonly utilized in AMP structural studies. AMPs with different structures in SDS and DPC can be searched with “SDS-DPC.” Despite the resounding success of protein structure prediction [14], caution should be taken in using the predicted peptide models, especially flexible peptides that may change conformations depending on binding targets, environmental conditions, and peptide oligomerization. The structure is only meaningful when it can be connected to a defined molecular target such as membranes or ribosomes. In natural AMPs, helical peptides contain abundant L, A, G, and K amino acids (Supplementary Fig. S7A, cyan). In contrast, beta-sheet AMPs comprise more C, G, and R (G for turns, C for structural stabilization via disulfide bonds, and R for molecular targeting) (Supplementary Fig. S7A, gold). We have also compared amino acid use of helical AMPs in different animal classes (Supplementary Fig. S7B). On average, fish had the highest contents of I, G, and H, while amphibians possessed the highest L and A. The highest F and S were found in scorpion helical AMPs. Interestingly, spiders showed the highest K (23.5%). In addition, mammals, reptiles, and spiders used an average length of ∼30 residues in designing helical AMPs, whereas amphibians, fish, scorpions, and insects preferred shorter helical peptides with 22–24 residues. In terms of net charge, reptiles showed the highest net charge (+9.05 on average), followed by spiders (+6.78). Likewise, we compared three-disulfide bond-stabilized β-sheet defensin-like peptides from different organisms. Mammals and insects shared similar amino acid profiles but clearly differ in A (high in insects) and R (high in mammals) (Supplementary Fig. S7C). Hence, the amino acid signatures on the same structural scaffolds often vary in different animal classes. Finally, the similarity in amino acid signatures may also be used to predict the geographic sources of amphibian AMPs based on a careful classification of these peptides discovered on the six continents. For instance, we found the amino acid profile for the peptides studied by Dr Barra and her team [10] most resembling that for Europe (see Supplementary Fig. S8 for details). This block is designed to document our understanding of the SAR of AMPs. Peptides with the same sequence but different activities due to chemical modifications are described here (e.g. with and without C-terminal amidation). This information block stores data concerning peptide stability to heat, light, chemicals, and proteases, all in vitro. The APD6 included 33 peptides annotated as “heat-stable” and 3 examples for “not heat stable” AMPs. This is usually indicated by minimal MIC changes (<4-fold) before and after treatment. As a quantitative measurement, “half-life in vitro” records peptide stability in biological tissues (e.g. serum/plasma wound fluids, blood, and saliva). We annotated 18 peptides with half-life data. The search format for stability in human plasma is “half-life in vitro:plasma:human.” Although PK/PD studies are currently limited for AMPs, this block is reserved for pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD). We identified nine peptides with reported half-lives in mice. The search format is “in vivo PK:mouse.” For convenience, red blood cells (RBCs) are most widely utilized for toxicity evaluation in vitro. Different blood cells and 50% hemolytic concentration (HC50) are also included. To date, 335 peptides are annotated using “human RBC,” 47 with “sheep RBC,” 9 with “chicken RBC,” and 9 with “pig RBC.” These classifications will allow users to retrieve data from the same blood cells such as human RBC to minimize cell-type differences. Cytotoxicity data for other mammalian cells are also included here. We compared hemolytic (HC50 < 100 μM) and nonhemolytic peptides (Supplementary Fig. S9). Remarkably, nonhemolytic AMPs (HC50 > 100 μM) had higher G, K, and R amino acids, while the hemolytic group showed higher hydrophobic I, L, F, and C. Correspondingly, the hemolytic group is characterized by a higher hydrophobic ratio (50.9%) than that of nonhemolytic group (44.6%). “Toxicity mechanism,” when reported, is included in a subsequent block. Although not always thoroughly tested, the toxicity data can include weight loss, maximum tolerated dose, tissue histology, blood cell counts, and kidney chemistry [45]. A search of “in vivo toxicity” returned 21 peptides. The testing subject can be searched by using the standard format: “in vivo toxicity:mouse” (12 entries edited). We started this registration in the APD3 [30]. Of 205 peptides with information for “animal model,” 148 studies used mice (animal model:mouse). Other animal models such as “rabbit,” “cattle,” “wax moth,” and “Caenorhabditis elegans” are depicted in Fig. 3F. Large-scale peptide production (kg to tons) is required for practical use, including clinical trials. While small peptides (<30 aa) are suitable for chemical synthesis, DNA recombinant technology is especially important for AMPs with longer sequences and posttranslational modifications. In the APD6, the average length of all the recombinantly expressed AMPs is 48.25 aa, while the average length for all synthetic AMPs is 19.09 aa. We obtained 245 entries from the search of “recombinant production” (177 using bacteria and 68 using yeast). The search format is “recombinant production:bacteria:Escherichia coli” (149 AMPs) and “recombinant production:yeast:Pichia pastoris” (62 peptides). Plant and insect expression systems can be searched in the same format (Fig. 3G). Formulation provides a useful approach to increase the likelihood of in vivo success due to increased peptide stability, targeted delivery, and controlled release. The APD6 has included 14 such examples. Initially created in the name field of the APD2, topical or systemic clinical trials are an integral part of the AMP information pipeline and can be searched via Add Info (16 found). Classic examples are OP-145, MBI 226, pexiganan, and iseganan derived from LL-37, indolicidin, magainin, and PG-1, respectively [1, 2]. While the clinically tested cationic AMPs mentioned above have not yet been approved to treat patients, two gene-coded bacteriocins (nisin and pediocin PA-1) and one antimicrobial protein lysozyme are utilized as food preservatives. To inspire the development of AMPs into novel antibiotics, the APD also included a few peptide antibiotics already in clinical use. These nonribosomal peptides include gramicidin A, gramicidin S, colistin, polymyxin B, and daptomycin. The APD6 also includes nonclassical treatment methods, including peptide inducers (e.g. sunlight, vitamin D, and short-chain fatty acids), vector delivery for peptide expression, and histone deacetylase inhibitors [51–53]. In summary, the establishment of the AMPIP is an important step toward AI discovery of future peptide antibiotics. Newly annotated positive and negative datasets for predictions of more robust peptides can be retrieved in the Add Info (just described). With the accumulation of more data, in vivo prediction will become possible as well. Like the current activity prediction [16, 17, 19, 20], a set of top candidates from each AI prediction will be selected for experimental validation. Peptide search was detailed in the description of APD version 1 [23]. The search for peptides utilized PubMed, PDB, and Swiss-Prot (UniProt). Starting with version 2, we also used Google Scholar. During the preparation of the APD6, we found AI-assisted web search is also helpful in locating the sequence and activity information for PXL01. All peptide functions in Supplementary Table S2 and all the key peptide features covered in the information pipeline below were utilized for literature search. Peptides will be registered into the APD if they satisfy the following criteria: (i) natural, synthetic, or predicted AMPs, (ii) known amino acid (aa) sequence, (iii) peptide activity determined, and (iv) peptide size <200 aa [30]. A new peptide sequence will be compared with the database by using the calculation and prediction interface [23]. If a record for the identical peptide already exists, new information will be merged with the existing entry. Natural AMPs with the same sequence can be searched using “found in multiple species” via the database field of Additional Information (Add Info, 135 entries). The APD previously programmed a powerful database search engine. The results of each database search can be sorted based on database ID, peptide length, net charge, or hydrophobic content. In addition, statistical analyses for all or a partial list of peptides from database search, including amino acid composition, average length, and net charge, can be conducted in the APD. Hydrophobic ratio (Pho) of a peptide can be calculated by dividing the number of the hydrophobic amino acids (I, V, L, F, C, M, A, and W) by the peptide length [23]. Despite our previous focus on natural AMPs, the original APD and subsequent versions covered natural (e.g. AP00001), synthetic (e.g. AP00029), and predicted (e.g. AP00281) peptides [23, 29, 30]. The APD6 has been reconfigured, enabling the expansion of all three groups of peptides. As of 18 March 2025, the APD6 contained a total of 5188 entries, including 3306 “natural AMPs,” 1380 “synthetic AMPs,” and 239 “predicted AMPs” (Fig. 1A). Each group of peptides can be searched using the quoted words in the “name” field. A search of “AMPs” alone retrieved the records for all peptides with demonstrated antimicrobial activity (4928 entries). Compared to the APD5 [32], 1915 peptides have been inserted, including 418 natural, 196 predicted, and 1301 synthetic peptides. Comparison of 3306 natural, 1380 synthetic, and 239 predicted AMPs in the APD6. (A) Current percentages of natural, predicted, and synthetic AMPs. Others include peptides without antimicrobial activity. (B) Amino acid signatures of natural, predicted, and synthetic AMPs. (C) Net charge, hydrophobic content, and length of natural, predicted, and synthetic AMPs. Data obtained from the APD6 at https://aps.unmc.edu. Our systematic classification of natural AMPs commenced in the APD2 [29] and completed in the APD3 [30]. Natural AMPs are classified based on the following properties: peptide source (kingdom and geographic region), biosynthetic machinery, amino acid sequence, chain number, chemical modification, structure, peptide bonding patterns, activity, and MOA [30]. These classifications have been updated recently [40]. Synthetic AMPs are made in laboratories investigating the structure–activity relationship (SAR) or seeking to increase peptide therapeutic potential (e.g. high activity and low toxicity). Recently, Link and colleagues made 90 000 peptide variants based on a single lasso template of ubonodin [41]. Because the number of possible synthetic peptides is unlimited and currently studied peptides are biased toward popular templates, only optimized synthetic peptides from each study were initially added to the APD to reduce sequence redundancy [6]. Later the decision was made to add representative synthetic peptides to the APD6. This change facilitated the establishment of a systematic classification scheme. Synthetic peptides may be obtained from (i) “library screen” or (ii) designed by different labs. Peptides designed based on natural templates are grouped under “natural derivative”. They can be obtained via (i) “amino acid substitution” (770 entries), (ii) “amino acid deletion” (36 entries), (iii) “sequence truncation” (195 entries), and (iv) “sequence extension” by a few residues (20 entries). A peptide template may be “animal-derived” (currently 605 entries), “plant-derived” (17 entries), “fungi-derived” (43 entries), or “bacteria-derived” (212 entries). In the APD6, the word “designed” refers to peptides with nonnatural sequences, which may be obtained via (i) “sequence shuffling” (152 entries), (ii) “hybrid peptide” (69 entries), (iii) “de novo designed” (124 entries), and (iv) “peptide conjugates” (19 entries). Peptide conjugates can contain a pathogen-targeting sequence, cell-penetration motifs, and even non-peptide moieties. All the quoted synthetic groups above can be searched in the “Source organism” field of the APD6. The establishment of a classification scheme for synthetic peptides makes it easier for researchers in the AMP field to retrieve a group of peptides of interest. It may also enable the generation of a defined set of synthetic peptides to test the prediction accuracy of AI models. The goal of prediction is to identify potential AMP sequences in the genomes using in silico methods based on the known sequence features of AMPs, such as high positive charge (APD web site), γ-motif, or disulfide bond patterns [42, 43]. This can also be accomplished reliably based on sequence alignment. In the AI age, an independent group for predicted AMPs with antimicrobial activity validated has been added to the APD6 [6]. At present, these peptides are split into two groups: “AI predicted” (180 annotated) and “other methods predicted” (18 assigned). Again, the quoted words can be searched in the Source field, which can also include biological sources of predicted peptides when reported. Unlike synthetic or predicted peptides with unlimited numbers, nature makes each peptide with a purpose, leading to a defined number of natural AMPs from the six life kingdoms. Therefore, when we ask about the total AMPs discovered to date, we mean “natural AMPs.” Figure 1B compares average amino acid compositions of natural, synthetic, and predicted AMPs in the APD6. Amino acids W, R, and K are most abundant in synthetic AMPs, but lowest in natural AMPs. In contrast, residues P, T, S, Q, N, E, and H are lowest in synthetic AMPs, but highest in natural AMPs. Since peptide prediction was made based on natural and synthetic sequences, it is not surprising that the amino acid contents of AI predicted AMPs may fall between those of natural and synthetic AMPs. Based on our further classification of synthetic peptides, the “designed” group was found to have the highest percentages for amino acids L, W, K, and R and lowest percentages for C, A, G, P, Y, Q, N, E, D, and H, indicative of a preferred use of L, W, K, and R in designing novel sequences (Supplementary Fig. S1). Hence, the majority of these synthetic peptides were made by following the classic amphipathic concept [1, 2, 6]. Evidently, natural AMPs form the basis for generating both synthetic and predicted peptides by increasing amino acids L, F, W, K, and R, and decreasing C, A, G, P, T, S, Q, N, E, D, and H (Fig. 1B). We then compared the distribution of net charge, hydrophobic ratio, and length of natural, predicted, and synthetic AMPs (Fig. 1C). While the peak hydrophobic ratios (Pho 31%–50%) remained similar, the hydrophobic profile of predicted AMPs more resembled that of natural peptides. Also, the majority of peptides in all the three groups had an averaged net charge in the range of +1 to +10. However, both synthetic and predicted groups possessed higher ratios between the +6 - +10 peptide group and the +1 - +5 peptide group. By considering synthesis cost, both synthetic and predicted peptides are tilted toward shorter peptides (11–20 residues), while the peak length range of the known natural AMPs is located between 21–30 residues. Since natural AMPs have been updated (Supplementary Table S1) and refined by excluding those without activity proof, it is useful to provide a current view on natural AMPs. Natural AMPs possess a biased amino acid composition with abundant L, A, G, and K (Fig. 1B). Although the majority of the peptides are cationic with a net charge in the range of +1 to +5, the upper limit for net charge has increased from +30 to +57 due to the inclusion of a histone H1 protein from Atlantic salmon [44]. The lower limit for net charge, −12, remains the same [30]. Most of natural peptides are 11–50 residues long with a hydrophobic content of 31%–50% (Fig. 1C). Our database analysis revealed that natural AMPs (<100 aa), which have an average hydrophobic ratio (Pho) of 42.5% and a net charge +3.8, are rather distinct from antimicrobial proteins (>100 aa), which are less hydrophobic (Pho 32.3%) but more cationic (+6.5). Structurally, AMPs fall into four unified classes: α, β, αβ, and non-αβ (Fig. 2A) [30]. The majority of natural AMPs are composed of single polypeptide chains. However, some AMPs consist of two or more chains. A search of “two-chain” and “natural AMPs” in the name field returned 55 peptides, consisting of 35 bacteriocins and 20 animal AMPs. Also, the two chains of animal AMPs are disulfide-linked and may be identical or different (search with “homodimer” or “heterodimer”). AMPs with two or more sequence domains (e.g. Cys-rich and Pro-rich) [4] can be searched using “modular design” (22 entries). Natural AMPs have been discovered in six life kingdoms: bacteria, archaea, protists, fungi, plants, and animals [30]. Figure 2B depicts the annual increase in the total bacterial, plant, and animal AMPs. Evidently, animals (76%) remain the dominant source for natural AMPs, followed by bacteria (12%) and plants (11%) (Fig. 2C). Animal peptides are further split into vertebrate and invertebrate AMPs, each consisting of multiple classes (Table 1). Insects have the highest number of known AMPs among invertebrates, whereas amphibians possess the highest number of known AMPs among vertebrates. In fact, amphibian AMPs (1111 entries with activity) account for 33.5% of natural AMPs with known antimicrobial activity. Natural AMPs may be posttranslationally modified (45% in the APD6). The count of chemically modified AMPs (29 types in Fig. 2D) and their search modes are documented in Table 2. The most common posttranslational modifications are disulfide bonding (39%), C-terminal amidation (20%), and Rana box formation (14%). The APD6 identified peptide examples for three types of additional chemical modifications (nitration, succinylation, and carboxymethylation). Landscape of natural AMPs in the APD6. (A) Four structural classes. (B) Growth of AMPs from bacteria, plants, and animals for two decades. (C) Percent of natural AMPs from the six life kingdoms. (D) Count of 29 types of chemically modified AMPs. (E) Plots of counts of the string of 2, 3, and 4 same amino acids. (F) Longest string of the same amino acid. (G) Growth of peptide functions in the APD. (H) and (I) Natural peptide counts with different activities in the APD. Natural AMPs from different kingdoms and classes in the APD aAs of March 2025. Total peptides in the APD, including 206 natural candidates with unknown antimicrobial activity. Posttranslational modifications of AMPs in the APDa aThe chemical modification search system was enabled in the APD2 [29]. All can be searched via the name field of the database using the XX code shown in this table. The only exception is disulfide-linked peptides, which can be searched using S=S in the name field. In addition, the number of disulfide bonds in the peptides can be searched by placing an arabic number in front. For instance, we obtained 558 and 433 natural AMPs with 1 and 3 disulfide bonds, respectively as of 27 March 2025. Up to three types of modifications can be searched simultaneously. For the 2025 data, counts for natural AMPs are given in parenthesis. We initially defined residues L, A, G, and K as frequently occurring amino acids (>10%) in amphibian AMPs [29]. When searched in pairs (e.g. AA and LL), these amino acids remain abundant (Fig. 2E). Moving to triplets (e.g. AAA) and quartets (e.g. AAAA), L and K dropped rapidly. We then tried to identify the longest amino acid string for each amino acid in natural AMPs (Fig. 2F). Glycine formed the longest string with 10 residues (GGGGGGGGGG), followed by A and P with 9 residues. While charged residues D, E, K, and R are clustered in the plot and formed 5–7 residue strings, hydrophobic amino acids, including I, V, F, C, and W, never passed three in a row (e.g. WWW). Four leucines (LLLL) or more were only found in two antimicrobial proteins. Such natural amino acid combinations may be applied to peptide design. For instance, verine [45] became much less hemolytic when WWWW was altered to the natural triplet WWW. Peptide search was detailed in the description of APD version 1 [23]. The search for peptides utilized PubMed, PDB, and Swiss-Prot (UniProt). Starting with version 2, we also used Google Scholar. During the preparation of the APD6, we found AI-assisted web search is also helpful in locating the sequence and activity information for PXL01. All peptide functions in Supplementary Table S2 and all the key peptide features covered in the information pipeline below were utilized for literature search. Peptides will be registered into the APD if they satisfy the following criteria: (i) natural, synthetic, or predicted AMPs, (ii) known amino acid (aa) sequence, (iii) peptide activity determined, and (iv) peptide size <200 aa [30]. A new peptide sequence will be compared with the database by using the calculation and prediction interface [23]. If a record for the identical peptide already exists, new information will be merged with the existing entry. Natural AMPs with the same sequence can be searched using “found in multiple species” via the database field of Additional Information (Add Info, 135 entries). The APD previously programmed a powerful database search engine. The results of each database search can be sorted based on database ID, peptide length, net charge, or hydrophobic content. In addition, statistical analyses for all or a partial list of peptides from database search, including amino acid composition, average length, and net charge, can be conducted in the APD. Hydrophobic ratio (Pho) of a peptide can be calculated by dividing the number of the hydrophobic amino acids (I, V, L, F, C, M, A, and W) by the peptide length [23]. Despite our previous focus on natural AMPs, the original APD and subsequent versions covered natural (e.g. AP00001), synthetic (e.g. AP00029), and predicted (e.g. AP00281) peptides [23, 29, 30]. The APD6 has been reconfigured, enabling the expansion of all three groups of peptides. As of 18 March 2025, the APD6 contained a total of 5188 entries, including 3306 “natural AMPs,” 1380 “synthetic AMPs,” and 239 “predicted AMPs” (Fig. 1A). Each group of peptides can be searched using the quoted words in the “name” field. A search of “AMPs” alone retrieved the records for all peptides with demonstrated antimicrobial activity (4928 entries). Compared to the APD5 [32], 1915 peptides have been inserted, including 418 natural, 196 predicted, and 1301 synthetic peptides. Comparison of 3306 natural, 1380 synthetic, and 239 predicted AMPs in the APD6. (A) Current percentages of natural, predicted, and synthetic AMPs. Others include peptides without antimicrobial activity. (B) Amino acid signatures of natural, predicted, and synthetic AMPs. (C) Net charge, hydrophobic content, and length of natural, predicted, and synthetic AMPs. Data obtained from the APD6 at https://aps.unmc.edu. Our systematic classification of natural AMPs commenced in the APD2 [29] and completed in the APD3 [30]. Natural AMPs are classified based on the following properties: peptide source (kingdom and geographic region), biosynthetic machinery, amino acid sequence, chain number, chemical modification, structure, peptide bonding patterns, activity, and MOA [30]. These classifications have been updated recently [40]. Synthetic AMPs are made in laboratories investigating the structure–activity relationship (SAR) or seeking to increase peptide therapeutic potential (e.g. high activity and low toxicity). Recently, Link and colleagues made 90 000 peptide variants based on a single lasso template of ubonodin [41]. Because the number of possible synthetic peptides is unlimited and currently studied peptides are biased toward popular templates, only optimized synthetic peptides from each study were initially added to the APD to reduce sequence redundancy [6]. Later the decision was made to add representative synthetic peptides to the APD6. This change facilitated the establishment of a systematic classification scheme. Synthetic peptides may be obtained from (i) “library screen” or (ii) designed by different labs. Peptides designed based on natural templates are grouped under “natural derivative”. They can be obtained via (i) “amino acid substitution” (770 entries), (ii) “amino acid deletion” (36 entries), (iii) “sequence truncation” (195 entries), and (iv) “sequence extension” by a few residues (20 entries). A peptide template may be “animal-derived” (currently 605 entries), “plant-derived” (17 entries), “fungi-derived” (43 entries), or “bacteria-derived” (212 entries). In the APD6, the word “designed” refers to peptides with nonnatural sequences, which may be obtained via (i) “sequence shuffling” (152 entries), (ii) “hybrid peptide” (69 entries), (iii) “de novo designed” (124 entries), and (iv) “peptide conjugates” (19 entries). Peptide conjugates can contain a pathogen-targeting sequence, cell-penetration motifs, and even non-peptide moieties. All the quoted synthetic groups above can be searched in the “Source organism” field of the APD6. The establishment of a classification scheme for synthetic peptides makes it easier for researchers in the AMP field to retrieve a group of peptides of interest. It may also enable the generation of a defined set of synthetic peptides to test the prediction accuracy of AI models. The goal of prediction is to identify potential AMP sequences in the genomes using in silico methods based on the known sequence features of AMPs, such as high positive charge (APD web site), γ-motif, or disulfide bond patterns [42, 43]. This can also be accomplished reliably based on sequence alignment. In the AI age, an independent group for predicted AMPs with antimicrobial activity validated has been added to the APD6 [6]. At present, these peptides are split into two groups: “AI predicted” (180 annotated) and “other methods predicted” (18 assigned). Again, the quoted words can be searched in the Source field, which can also include biological sources of predicted peptides when reported. Our systematic classification of natural AMPs commenced in the APD2 [29] and completed in the APD3 [30]. Natural AMPs are classified based on the following properties: peptide source (kingdom and geographic region), biosynthetic machinery, amino acid sequence, chain number, chemical modification, structure, peptide bonding patterns, activity, and MOA [30]. These classifications have been updated recently [40]. Synthetic AMPs are made in laboratories investigating the structure–activity relationship (SAR) or seeking to increase peptide therapeutic potential (e.g. high activity and low toxicity). Recently, Link and colleagues made 90 000 peptide variants based on a single lasso template of ubonodin [41]. Because the number of possible synthetic peptides is unlimited and currently studied peptides are biased toward popular templates, only optimized synthetic peptides from each study were initially added to the APD to reduce sequence redundancy [6]. Later the decision was made to add representative synthetic peptides to the APD6. This change facilitated the establishment of a systematic classification scheme. Synthetic peptides may be obtained from (i) “library screen” or (ii) designed by different labs. Peptides designed based on natural templates are grouped under “natural derivative”. They can be obtained via (i) “amino acid substitution” (770 entries), (ii) “amino acid deletion” (36 entries), (iii) “sequence truncation” (195 entries), and (iv) “sequence extension” by a few residues (20 entries). A peptide template may be “animal-derived” (currently 605 entries), “plant-derived” (17 entries), “fungi-derived” (43 entries), or “bacteria-derived” (212 entries). In the APD6, the word “designed” refers to peptides with nonnatural sequences, which may be obtained via (i) “sequence shuffling” (152 entries), (ii) “hybrid peptide” (69 entries), (iii) “de novo designed” (124 entries), and (iv) “peptide conjugates” (19 entries). Peptide conjugates can contain a pathogen-targeting sequence, cell-penetration motifs, and even non-peptide moieties. All the quoted synthetic groups above can be searched in the “Source organism” field of the APD6. The establishment of a classification scheme for synthetic peptides makes it easier for researchers in the AMP field to retrieve a group of peptides of interest. It may also enable the generation of a defined set of synthetic peptides to test the prediction accuracy of AI models. The goal of prediction is to identify potential AMP sequences in the genomes using in silico methods based on the known sequence features of AMPs, such as high positive charge (APD web site), γ-motif, or disulfide bond patterns [42, 43]. This can also be accomplished reliably based on sequence alignment. In the AI age, an independent group for predicted AMPs with antimicrobial activity validated has been added to the APD6 [6]. At present, these peptides are split into two groups: “AI predicted” (180 annotated) and “other methods predicted” (18 assigned). Again, the quoted words can be searched in the Source field, which can also include biological sources of predicted peptides when reported. Unlike synthetic or predicted peptides with unlimited numbers, nature makes each peptide with a purpose, leading to a defined number of natural AMPs from the six life kingdoms. Therefore, when we ask about the total AMPs discovered to date, we mean “natural AMPs.” Figure 1B compares average amino acid compositions of natural, synthetic, and predicted AMPs in the APD6. Amino acids W, R, and K are most abundant in synthetic AMPs, but lowest in natural AMPs. In contrast, residues P, T, S, Q, N, E, and H are lowest in synthetic AMPs, but highest in natural AMPs. Since peptide prediction was made based on natural and synthetic sequences, it is not surprising that the amino acid contents of AI predicted AMPs may fall between those of natural and synthetic AMPs. Based on our further classification of synthetic peptides, the “designed” group was found to have the highest percentages for amino acids L, W, K, and R and lowest percentages for C, A, G, P, Y, Q, N, E, D, and H, indicative of a preferred use of L, W, K, and R in designing novel sequences (Supplementary Fig. S1). Hence, the majority of these synthetic peptides were made by following the classic amphipathic concept [1, 2, 6]. Evidently, natural AMPs form the basis for generating both synthetic and predicted peptides by increasing amino acids L, F, W, K, and R, and decreasing C, A, G, P, T, S, Q, N, E, D, and H (Fig. 1B). We then compared the distribution of net charge, hydrophobic ratio, and length of natural, predicted, and synthetic AMPs (Fig. 1C). While the peak hydrophobic ratios (Pho 31%–50%) remained similar, the hydrophobic profile of predicted AMPs more resembled that of natural peptides. Also, the majority of peptides in all the three groups had an averaged net charge in the range of +1 to +10. However, both synthetic and predicted groups possessed higher ratios between the +6 - +10 peptide group and the +1 - +5 peptide group. By considering synthesis cost, both synthetic and predicted peptides are tilted toward shorter peptides (11–20 residues), while the peak length range of the known natural AMPs is located between 21–30 residues. Since natural AMPs have been updated (Supplementary Table S1) and refined by excluding those without activity proof, it is useful to provide a current view on natural AMPs. Natural AMPs possess a biased amino acid composition with abundant L, A, G, and K (Fig. 1B). Although the majority of the peptides are cationic with a net charge in the range of +1 to +5, the upper limit for net charge has increased from +30 to +57 due to the inclusion of a histone H1 protein from Atlantic salmon [44]. The lower limit for net charge, −12, remains the same [30]. Most of natural peptides are 11–50 residues long with a hydrophobic content of 31%–50% (Fig. 1C). Our database analysis revealed that natural AMPs (<100 aa), which have an average hydrophobic ratio (Pho) of 42.5% and a net charge +3.8, are rather distinct from antimicrobial proteins (>100 aa), which are less hydrophobic (Pho 32.3%) but more cationic (+6.5). Structurally, AMPs fall into four unified classes: α, β, αβ, and non-αβ (Fig. 2A) [30]. The majority of natural AMPs are composed of single polypeptide chains. However, some AMPs consist of two or more chains. A search of “two-chain” and “natural AMPs” in the name field returned 55 peptides, consisting of 35 bacteriocins and 20 animal AMPs. Also, the two chains of animal AMPs are disulfide-linked and may be identical or different (search with “homodimer” or “heterodimer”). AMPs with two or more sequence domains (e.g. Cys-rich and Pro-rich) [4] can be searched using “modular design” (22 entries). Natural AMPs have been discovered in six life kingdoms: bacteria, archaea, protists, fungi, plants, and animals [30]. Figure 2B depicts the annual increase in the total bacterial, plant, and animal AMPs. Evidently, animals (76%) remain the dominant source for natural AMPs, followed by bacteria (12%) and plants (11%) (Fig. 2C). Animal peptides are further split into vertebrate and invertebrate AMPs, each consisting of multiple classes (Table 1). Insects have the highest number of known AMPs among invertebrates, whereas amphibians possess the highest number of known AMPs among vertebrates. In fact, amphibian AMPs (1111 entries with activity) account for 33.5% of natural AMPs with known antimicrobial activity. Natural AMPs may be posttranslationally modified (45% in the APD6). The count of chemically modified AMPs (29 types in Fig. 2D) and their search modes are documented in Table 2. The most common posttranslational modifications are disulfide bonding (39%), C-terminal amidation (20%), and Rana box formation (14%). The APD6 identified peptide examples for three types of additional chemical modifications (nitration, succinylation, and carboxymethylation). Landscape of natural AMPs in the APD6. (A) Four structural classes. (B) Growth of AMPs from bacteria, plants, and animals for two decades. (C) Percent of natural AMPs from the six life kingdoms. (D) Count of 29 types of chemically modified AMPs. (E) Plots of counts of the string of 2, 3, and 4 same amino acids. (F) Longest string of the same amino acid. (G) Growth of peptide functions in the APD. (H) and (I) Natural peptide counts with different activities in the APD. Natural AMPs from different kingdoms and classes in the APD aAs of March 2025. Total peptides in the APD, including 206 natural candidates with unknown antimicrobial activity. Posttranslational modifications of AMPs in the APDa aThe chemical modification search system was enabled in the APD2 [29]. All can be searched via the name field of the database using the XX code shown in this table. The only exception is disulfide-linked peptides, which can be searched using S=S in the name field. In addition, the number of disulfide bonds in the peptides can be searched by placing an arabic number in front. For instance, we obtained 558 and 433 natural AMPs with 1 and 3 disulfide bonds, respectively as of 27 March 2025. Up to three types of modifications can be searched simultaneously. For the 2025 data, counts for natural AMPs are given in parenthesis. We initially defined residues L, A, G, and K as frequently occurring amino acids (>10%) in amphibian AMPs [29]. When searched in pairs (e.g. AA and LL), these amino acids remain abundant (Fig. 2E). Moving to triplets (e.g. AAA) and quartets (e.g. AAAA), L and K dropped rapidly. We then tried to identify the longest amino acid string for each amino acid in natural AMPs (Fig. 2F). Glycine formed the longest string with 10 residues (GGGGGGGGGG), followed by A and P with 9 residues. While charged residues D, E, K, and R are clustered in the plot and formed 5–7 residue strings, hydrophobic amino acids, including I, V, F, C, and W, never passed three in a row (e.g. WWW). Four leucines (LLLL) or more were only found in two antimicrobial proteins. Such natural amino acid combinations may be applied to peptide design. For instance, verine [45] became much less hemolytic when WWWW was altered to the natural triplet WWW. AMPs can possess functions beyond antimicrobial activity [1, 2, 7]. The APD database started to include this information in 2003 [23]. Supplementary Table S2 documents a list of reported peptide activities added to each version of the APD in the past two decades. The growth of total peptide functions in the APD can be viewed in Fig. 2G. Another 7 functions were inserted into the APD6, bringing the current total to 32. These include 13 “bacteria-agglutinating” peptides (replacing the previous two-chain peptide icon), 9 “nematocidal” peptides (replacing the previous “surface immobilized peptides”), 20 “cell-penetrating” AMPs, 13 “proinflammatory” AMPs, 3 “sleep”-related peptides, 84 “anti-VRE” (vancomycin-resistant enterococcus) AMPs, and 17 “amyloid AMPs.” The quoted words can be directly searched in Add Info. Supplementary Table S2 summarizes search methods for all searchable functions accumulated to date. Antibacterial peptides constitute the largest group, followed by antifungal AMPs (Fig. 2H). For clarity, peptide functions with <100 counts are plotted in Fig. 2I. The amino acid profiles of natural AMPs for each peptide function can vary depending on the targeted organism or desired peptide function [31]. We previously found the highest arginine content for antiviral peptides, and this observation was successfully utilized to enhance peptide anti-HIV activity [46]. The use of the wheel of function in designing antibacterial, antiviral, and antifungal peptides has been demonstrated [33–36]. In the APD6, some peptide activities can be searched at multiple levels. While the term “antimicrobial” covers antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, and antiparasitic activities, antibacterial peptides were split into anti-Gram+ and anti-Gram− in 2008 [29]. One can also search for a set of peptides against MRSA, TB, and VRE. In addition, many more specific bacterial pathogen species can be searched in the Add Info field [30]. For instance, searches of E. coli, S. aureus, and P. aeruginosa returned 2925, 2726, and 1392 AMPs against these pathogens, respectively. One should be cautious with such species-specific activity datasets. Since numerous peptides in the datasets can have a wide spectrum of activity, creation of organism-specific peptides is not warranted. Antimicrobial development in silico requires a variety of information relevant to preclinical and/or clinical studies (Fig. 3A). To store such information, we explored the use of the Add Info field in the APD [23]. A brief evolution of the information content in this field is depicted in Supplementary Fig. S2. This field started to expand after 2012. Recently, we organized this information systematically into a pipeline and reformatted it for clarity by making the subtitle bold. The available information scope is peptide dependent. A comprehensive example is shown in Supplementary Scheme S1 for human cathelicidin LL-37 (AP00301). We also enabled multilevel searches separated by colon (see below). In the following, we briefly describe the new peptide information in the AMPIP edited to date. All the headings below can be searched in Add Info. Antimicrobial peptide information pipeline and findings. (A) The original APD database platform is surrounded by wheel of function: G, antibacterial; V, antiviral; F, antifungal; P, antiparasitic; I, insecticidal; C, anticancer; D, antimalarial; W, wound healing; and S, spermicidal (see Supplementary Table S2 for other peptide activities). Amino acid comparison of the two peptide groups active and inactive against E. coli (B) and S. aureus (C). Amino acid comparison of the two peptides groups sensitive and insensitive to pH changes (D) or with and without bacterial resistance development (E). (F) Animal models used for efficacy test of AMPs in vivo. (G) Summary of recombinant production of AMPs. This field emphasizes important biological functions (sleep, fur color, sperm fertilization) as well as connections with human diseases (infectious, Alzheimer, cancer, and diabetic) (Supplementary Fig. S3). This section is reserved for host expression of AMPs, which can be induced or constitutive. When available, the signal pathways (e.g. imd and toll) for peptide expression [47] are also documented. We have enabled the search of additional details for discovery in the “Source” field: leaves, stem, roots, and seeds for plants, and neutrophils, T cells, venom, airway, skin, and lung for animals. A search of “skin” resulted in 448 peptides, whereas a search of “venom” gave 189 peptides. In the case of bacteriocins, this information block can include the biological machinery for expressing, processing, transporting, and even self-immunity [48]. Since posttranslational modification may affect peptide properties, the annotations including this information were added to the APD starting 2008 [29]. Table 2 documents the current 29 types of chemical modifications and peptide counts. Add Info provides more modification details for over 500 entries. In the APD6, “peptide engineering” is reserved for human-made peptides with nonstandard amino acids (e.g. d-amino acids and biphenylalanine) or nonstandard chemical bonds (i.e. stapled peptides) to enhance stability to proteases. Biomedical devices are widely utilized to improve life quality. One potential problem is microbial contamination, followed by formation of difficult-to-remove biofilms. Immobilizing AMPs on the surface of medical devices and implants may prevent bacterial colonization and biofilm formation [49]. “Surface immobilized peptides” have been relocated into the information pipeline and can be searched via Add Info (33 entries). The APD6 recorded 4237 antibacterial peptides with known activity measured by various experimental methods, including diffusion assays, the microdilution method, bacterial killing, and even OD differences [23]. Based on minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC), AMPs are classified into active (MIC < 100 μM) and inactive (MIC > 100 μM) groups [6, 30]. Active and inactive peptides against E. coli can be searched using “E. coli” (2669 entries) and “E.coli” (349 entries), respectively. We observed higher contents of basic K and R but lower levels of hydrophobic I, L, F, and A for E. coli-active peptides (Fig. 3B). The same trend was observed for active and inactive peptides against K. pneumoniae (Supplementary Fig. S4A) and P. aeruginosa (Supplementary Fig. S4B). In contrast, L is higher in AMPs active against Gram-positive S. aureus, whereas K is lower (Fig. 3C). To handle a large number of bacterial clinical strains used in antimicrobial susceptibility assays for the same peptide, we grouped similar MIC values into a range (e.g. 8–32 μM) and indicated the number of strains tested. Any MIC out of the range (e.g. >100 μM) will be recorded separately. Importantly, the APD provides warning messages for various reasons such as “nonstandard assay” conditions (67 entries) and “other bacteria not tested” (182 entries). While nonstandard assays using less media tend to give lower MIC values, limited bacteria testing may be insufficient to define bacteria activity spectrum (e.g. Gram types). These unique annotations will aid in noise filtering for AI prediction with improved accuracy. The word “robustness” means that a peptide retains its activity under various conditions (e.g. salts, pH, and serum). This information has been edited for over 300 peptides. A general search format of salt-sensitive or -insensitive AMPs was reported previously [6]. The APD6 has advanced this search. A search of “NaCl-sensitive:E. coli” produced 47 entries with activity sensitive to NaCl when tested using E. coli. A peptide is annotated as sensitive if its MIC has changed ≥4-fold. Similarly, the “NaCl-insensitive:E. coli” search retrieved 56 entries. In addition, we found 10 entries for “CaCl2-sensitive:S. aureus.” Likewise, the APD6 includes pH effects on peptide activity. A comparison of the pH-sensitive and -insensitive groups (Fig. 3D) revealed that the “pH-sensitive” group possessed impressive levels of C and R amino acids, due to the presence of multiple defensins [50]. In contrast, the “pH-insensitive” group had higher I, L, M, A, P, Y, Q, N, and K, implying helical peptides. Other factors such as sensitivity to human serum are also annotated here. We found 24 “serum-sensitive” and 16 “serum-insensitive” AMPs. Their amino acid profiles are plotted in Supplementary Fig. S5. Synergy between natural AMPs provides another layer of host protection and slows down resistance development [1, 2, 5]. Synergistic effects between AMPs were first annotated in the APD2 [29]. We obtained 45 peptides when we searched the name field with JJsn. The APD6 covers not only inter-peptide synergy but also synergy with other agents such as antibiotics and antibodies. A search of “synergy:antibiotic” in Add Info led to 21 peptides. It is remarkably difficult for bacteria to develop resistance to cationic AMPs as these peptides cause membrane disruption [1]. However, bacterial resistance development, usually based on multiple passage experiments, has been reported. To provide insight into resistance development, the APD6 has classified AMPs into two searchable groups: “resistance development:yes” (16 entries) and “resistance development:no” (43 entries). One can also search the microbial types that developed resistance using “resistance development:yes:bacteria:E. coli” (5 entries). Likewise, fungal resistance can be searched by replacing “bacteria” with “fungi,” followed by a defined fungal organism. Figure 3E compares two groups of AMPs with and without bacterial resistance. On average, the 16 AMPs with recorded resistance had a lower hydrophobic ratio (Pho 34.8%) than those without resistance (Pho 44.2%). Interestingly, those with resistance development had high percentages of P (11.9%) and R (20%). In contrast, no resistant AMPs possessed higher L (11.9%) and K (18.7%) (Fig. 3E). Such amino acid compositions are remarkably different. The former implies the presence of Pro-rich AMPs, while the latter points at classic amphipathic helical peptides known to target membranes. This finding suggests that the tendency for bacteria to develop resistance depends on peptide class. “Resistance mechanism” is also included (18 entries) if such information is elucidated. Natural AMPs can target anionic bacterial membranes [1, 2], cell wall, DNA, and ribosomes (Supplementary Fig. S6). We initially documented this information in the APD2 (search using the BB code in the name field; Table 3). For instance, BBMm means membrane targeting, while BBN indicates DNA binding. The same activity for d- and l-forms of the same peptide is frequently used to support membrane targeting (search with D = L, 28 entries edited). The d-form consisting of all d-amino acids is a mirror image of the same peptide (l-form) made of normal l-amino acids. BBribo denotes a ribosome inhibitory peptide. Nature has designed different structures for different molecular targets. While amphipathic α-helices act on bacterial membranes, proline-rich AMPs with an extended structure (a type of non-αβ structure) bind to bacterial ribosomes. Add Info in the APD6 provides further details. We have annotated 238 entries for MOA:bacteria and 39 peptides for MOA:fungi. APD statistics for binding partners/molecular targets of AMPsa aData obtained from the updated APD (https://aps.unmc.edu). The APD6 contains records for 532 α-helical, 98 β-sheet, 108 αβ, and 30 non-αβ 3D structures for natural AMPs. Of 528 AMPs with 3D structures, 88% were determined by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Also included are helical structures demonstrated by circular dichroism (CD). In the APD6, AMPs with structures determined by both NMR and X-ray diffraction methods can be searched using “NMR + X” (13 cases). One can also search membrane-mimetic models using “TFE” (484 entries), “SDS” (314 entries), “DPC” (95 entries), “D8PG” (6 entries), and “lipid bilayers” (12 entries). Clearly, trifluoroethanol (TFE), sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and dodecylphosphocholine (DPC) are commonly utilized in AMP structural studies. AMPs with different structures in SDS and DPC can be searched with “SDS-DPC.” Despite the resounding success of protein structure prediction [14], caution should be taken in using the predicted peptide models, especially flexible peptides that may change conformations depending on binding targets, environmental conditions, and peptide oligomerization. The structure is only meaningful when it can be connected to a defined molecular target such as membranes or ribosomes. In natural AMPs, helical peptides contain abundant L, A, G, and K amino acids (Supplementary Fig. S7A, cyan). In contrast, beta-sheet AMPs comprise more C, G, and R (G for turns, C for structural stabilization via disulfide bonds, and R for molecular targeting) (Supplementary Fig. S7A, gold). We have also compared amino acid use of helical AMPs in different animal classes (Supplementary Fig. S7B). On average, fish had the highest contents of I, G, and H, while amphibians possessed the highest L and A. The highest F and S were found in scorpion helical AMPs. Interestingly, spiders showed the highest K (23.5%). In addition, mammals, reptiles, and spiders used an average length of ∼30 residues in designing helical AMPs, whereas amphibians, fish, scorpions, and insects preferred shorter helical peptides with 22–24 residues. In terms of net charge, reptiles showed the highest net charge (+9.05 on average), followed by spiders (+6.78). Likewise, we compared three-disulfide bond-stabilized β-sheet defensin-like peptides from different organisms. Mammals and insects shared similar amino acid profiles but clearly differ in A (high in insects) and R (high in mammals) (Supplementary Fig. S7C). Hence, the amino acid signatures on the same structural scaffolds often vary in different animal classes. Finally, the similarity in amino acid signatures may also be used to predict the geographic sources of amphibian AMPs based on a careful classification of these peptides discovered on the six continents. For instance, we found the amino acid profile for the peptides studied by Dr Barra and her team [10] most resembling that for Europe (see Supplementary Fig. S8 for details). This block is designed to document our understanding of the SAR of AMPs. Peptides with the same sequence but different activities due to chemical modifications are described here (e.g. with and without C-terminal amidation). This information block stores data concerning peptide stability to heat, light, chemicals, and proteases, all in vitro. The APD6 included 33 peptides annotated as “heat-stable” and 3 examples for “not heat stable” AMPs. This is usually indicated by minimal MIC changes (<4-fold) before and after treatment. As a quantitative measurement, “half-life in vitro” records peptide stability in biological tissues (e.g. serum/plasma wound fluids, blood, and saliva). We annotated 18 peptides with half-life data. The search format for stability in human plasma is “half-life in vitro:plasma:human.” Although PK/PD studies are currently limited for AMPs, this block is reserved for pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD). We identified nine peptides with reported half-lives in mice. The search format is “in vivo PK:mouse.” For convenience, red blood cells (RBCs) are most widely utilized for toxicity evaluation in vitro. Different blood cells and 50% hemolytic concentration (HC50) are also included. To date, 335 peptides are annotated using “human RBC,” 47 with “sheep RBC,” 9 with “chicken RBC,” and 9 with “pig RBC.” These classifications will allow users to retrieve data from the same blood cells such as human RBC to minimize cell-type differences. Cytotoxicity data for other mammalian cells are also included here. We compared hemolytic (HC50 < 100 μM) and nonhemolytic peptides (Supplementary Fig. S9). Remarkably, nonhemolytic AMPs (HC50 > 100 μM) had higher G, K, and R amino acids, while the hemolytic group showed higher hydrophobic I, L, F, and C. Correspondingly, the hemolytic group is characterized by a higher hydrophobic ratio (50.9%) than that of nonhemolytic group (44.6%). “Toxicity mechanism,” when reported, is included in a subsequent block. Although not always thoroughly tested, the toxicity data can include weight loss, maximum tolerated dose, tissue histology, blood cell counts, and kidney chemistry [45]. A search of “in vivo toxicity” returned 21 peptides. The testing subject can be searched by using the standard format: “in vivo toxicity:mouse” (12 entries edited). We started this registration in the APD3 [30]. Of 205 peptides with information for “animal model,” 148 studies used mice (animal model:mouse). Other animal models such as “rabbit,” “cattle,” “wax moth,” and “Caenorhabditis elegans” are depicted in Fig. 3F. Large-scale peptide production (kg to tons) is required for practical use, including clinical trials. While small peptides (<30 aa) are suitable for chemical synthesis, DNA recombinant technology is especially important for AMPs with longer sequences and posttranslational modifications. In the APD6, the average length of all the recombinantly expressed AMPs is 48.25 aa, while the average length for all synthetic AMPs is 19.09 aa. We obtained 245 entries from the search of “recombinant production” (177 using bacteria and 68 using yeast). The search format is “recombinant production:bacteria:Escherichia coli” (149 AMPs) and “recombinant production:yeast:Pichia pastoris” (62 peptides). Plant and insect expression systems can be searched in the same format (Fig. 3G). Formulation provides a useful approach to increase the likelihood of in vivo success due to increased peptide stability, targeted delivery, and controlled release. The APD6 has included 14 such examples. Initially created in the name field of the APD2, topical or systemic clinical trials are an integral part of the AMP information pipeline and can be searched via Add Info (16 found). Classic examples are OP-145, MBI 226, pexiganan, and iseganan derived from LL-37, indolicidin, magainin, and PG-1, respectively [1, 2]. While the clinically tested cationic AMPs mentioned above have not yet been approved to treat patients, two gene-coded bacteriocins (nisin and pediocin PA-1) and one antimicrobial protein lysozyme are utilized as food preservatives. To inspire the development of AMPs into novel antibiotics, the APD also included a few peptide antibiotics already in clinical use. These nonribosomal peptides include gramicidin A, gramicidin S, colistin, polymyxin B, and daptomycin. The APD6 also includes nonclassical treatment methods, including peptide inducers (e.g. sunlight, vitamin D, and short-chain fatty acids), vector delivery for peptide expression, and histone deacetylase inhibitors [51–53]. In summary, the establishment of the AMPIP is an important step toward AI discovery of future peptide antibiotics. Newly annotated positive and negative datasets for predictions of more robust peptides can be retrieved in the Add Info (just described). With the accumulation of more data, in vivo prediction will become possible as well. Like the current activity prediction [16, 17, 19, 20], a set of top candidates from each AI prediction will be selected for experimental validation. This field emphasizes important biological functions (sleep, fur color, sperm fertilization) as well as connections with human diseases (infectious, Alzheimer, cancer, and diabetic) (Supplementary Fig. S3). This section is reserved for host expression of AMPs, which can be induced or constitutive. When available, the signal pathways (e.g. imd and toll) for peptide expression [47] are also documented. We have enabled the search of additional details for discovery in the “Source” field: leaves, stem, roots, and seeds for plants, and neutrophils, T cells, venom, airway, skin, and lung for animals. A search of “skin” resulted in 448 peptides, whereas a search of “venom” gave 189 peptides. In the case of bacteriocins, this information block can include the biological machinery for expressing, processing, transporting, and even self-immunity [48]. Since posttranslational modification may affect peptide properties, the annotations including this information were added to the APD starting 2008 [29]. Table 2 documents the current 29 types of chemical modifications and peptide counts. Add Info provides more modification details for over 500 entries. In the APD6, “peptide engineering” is reserved for human-made peptides with nonstandard amino acids (e.g. d-amino acids and biphenylalanine) or nonstandard chemical bonds (i.e. stapled peptides) to enhance stability to proteases. Biomedical devices are widely utilized to improve life quality. One potential problem is microbial contamination, followed by formation of difficult-to-remove biofilms. Immobilizing AMPs on the surface of medical devices and implants may prevent bacterial colonization and biofilm formation [49]. “Surface immobilized peptides” have been relocated into the information pipeline and can be searched via Add Info (33 entries). The APD6 recorded 4237 antibacterial peptides with known activity measured by various experimental methods, including diffusion assays, the microdilution method, bacterial killing, and even OD differences [23]. Based on minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC), AMPs are classified into active (MIC < 100 μM) and inactive (MIC > 100 μM) groups [6, 30]. Active and inactive peptides against E. coli can be searched using “E. coli” (2669 entries) and “E.coli” (349 entries), respectively. We observed higher contents of basic K and R but lower levels of hydrophobic I, L, F, and A for E. coli-active peptides (Fig. 3B). The same trend was observed for active and inactive peptides against K. pneumoniae (Supplementary Fig. S4A) and P. aeruginosa (Supplementary Fig. S4B). In contrast, L is higher in AMPs active against Gram-positive S. aureus, whereas K is lower (Fig. 3C). To handle a large number of bacterial clinical strains used in antimicrobial susceptibility assays for the same peptide, we grouped similar MIC values into a range (e.g. 8–32 μM) and indicated the number of strains tested. Any MIC out of the range (e.g. >100 μM) will be recorded separately. Importantly, the APD provides warning messages for various reasons such as “nonstandard assay” conditions (67 entries) and “other bacteria not tested” (182 entries). While nonstandard assays using less media tend to give lower MIC values, limited bacteria testing may be insufficient to define bacteria activity spectrum (e.g. Gram types). These unique annotations will aid in noise filtering for AI prediction with improved accuracy. The word “robustness” means that a peptide retains its activity under various conditions (e.g. salts, pH, and serum). This information has been edited for over 300 peptides. A general search format of salt-sensitive or -insensitive AMPs was reported previously [6]. The APD6 has advanced this search. A search of “NaCl-sensitive:E. coli” produced 47 entries with activity sensitive to NaCl when tested using E. coli. A peptide is annotated as sensitive if its MIC has changed ≥4-fold. Similarly, the “NaCl-insensitive:E. coli” search retrieved 56 entries. In addition, we found 10 entries for “CaCl2-sensitive:S. aureus.” Likewise, the APD6 includes pH effects on peptide activity. A comparison of the pH-sensitive and -insensitive groups (Fig. 3D) revealed that the “pH-sensitive” group possessed impressive levels of C and R amino acids, due to the presence of multiple defensins [50]. In contrast, the “pH-insensitive” group had higher I, L, M, A, P, Y, Q, N, and K, implying helical peptides. Other factors such as sensitivity to human serum are also annotated here. We found 24 “serum-sensitive” and 16 “serum-insensitive” AMPs. Their amino acid profiles are plotted in Supplementary Fig. S5. Synergy between natural AMPs provides another layer of host protection and slows down resistance development [1, 2, 5]. Synergistic effects between AMPs were first annotated in the APD2 [29]. We obtained 45 peptides when we searched the name field with JJsn. The APD6 covers not only inter-peptide synergy but also synergy with other agents such as antibiotics and antibodies. A search of “synergy:antibiotic” in Add Info led to 21 peptides. It is remarkably difficult for bacteria to develop resistance to cationic AMPs as these peptides cause membrane disruption [1]. However, bacterial resistance development, usually based on multiple passage experiments, has been reported. To provide insight into resistance development, the APD6 has classified AMPs into two searchable groups: “resistance development:yes” (16 entries) and “resistance development:no” (43 entries). One can also search the microbial types that developed resistance using “resistance development:yes:bacteria:E. coli” (5 entries). Likewise, fungal resistance can be searched by replacing “bacteria” with “fungi,” followed by a defined fungal organism. Figure 3E compares two groups of AMPs with and without bacterial resistance. On average, the 16 AMPs with recorded resistance had a lower hydrophobic ratio (Pho 34.8%) than those without resistance (Pho 44.2%). Interestingly, those with resistance development had high percentages of P (11.9%) and R (20%). In contrast, no resistant AMPs possessed higher L (11.9%) and K (18.7%) (Fig. 3E). Such amino acid compositions are remarkably different. The former implies the presence of Pro-rich AMPs, while the latter points at classic amphipathic helical peptides known to target membranes. This finding suggests that the tendency for bacteria to develop resistance depends on peptide class. “Resistance mechanism” is also included (18 entries) if such information is elucidated. Natural AMPs can target anionic bacterial membranes [1, 2], cell wall, DNA, and ribosomes (Supplementary Fig. S6). We initially documented this information in the APD2 (search using the BB code in the name field; Table 3). For instance, BBMm means membrane targeting, while BBN indicates DNA binding. The same activity for d- and l-forms of the same peptide is frequently used to support membrane targeting (search with D = L, 28 entries edited). The d-form consisting of all d-amino acids is a mirror image of the same peptide (l-form) made of normal l-amino acids. BBribo denotes a ribosome inhibitory peptide. Nature has designed different structures for different molecular targets. While amphipathic α-helices act on bacterial membranes, proline-rich AMPs with an extended structure (a type of non-αβ structure) bind to bacterial ribosomes. Add Info in the APD6 provides further details. We have annotated 238 entries for MOA:bacteria and 39 peptides for MOA:fungi. APD statistics for binding partners/molecular targets of AMPsa aData obtained from the updated APD (https://aps.unmc.edu). The APD6 contains records for 532 α-helical, 98 β-sheet, 108 αβ, and 30 non-αβ 3D structures for natural AMPs. Of 528 AMPs with 3D structures, 88% were determined by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. Also included are helical structures demonstrated by circular dichroism (CD). In the APD6, AMPs with structures determined by both NMR and X-ray diffraction methods can be searched using “NMR + X” (13 cases). One can also search membrane-mimetic models using “TFE” (484 entries), “SDS” (314 entries), “DPC” (95 entries), “D8PG” (6 entries), and “lipid bilayers” (12 entries). Clearly, trifluoroethanol (TFE), sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and dodecylphosphocholine (DPC) are commonly utilized in AMP structural studies. AMPs with different structures in SDS and DPC can be searched with “SDS-DPC.” Despite the resounding success of protein structure prediction [14], caution should be taken in using the predicted peptide models, especially flexible peptides that may change conformations depending on binding targets, environmental conditions, and peptide oligomerization. The structure is only meaningful when it can be connected to a defined molecular target such as membranes or ribosomes. In natural AMPs, helical peptides contain abundant L, A, G, and K amino acids (Supplementary Fig. S7A, cyan). In contrast, beta-sheet AMPs comprise more C, G, and R (G for turns, C for structural stabilization via disulfide bonds, and R for molecular targeting) (Supplementary Fig. S7A, gold). We have also compared amino acid use of helical AMPs in different animal classes (Supplementary Fig. S7B). On average, fish had the highest contents of I, G, and H, while amphibians possessed the highest L and A. The highest F and S were found in scorpion helical AMPs. Interestingly, spiders showed the highest K (23.5%). In addition, mammals, reptiles, and spiders used an average length of ∼30 residues in designing helical AMPs, whereas amphibians, fish, scorpions, and insects preferred shorter helical peptides with 22–24 residues. In terms of net charge, reptiles showed the highest net charge (+9.05 on average), followed by spiders (+6.78). Likewise, we compared three-disulfide bond-stabilized β-sheet defensin-like peptides from different organisms. Mammals and insects shared similar amino acid profiles but clearly differ in A (high in insects) and R (high in mammals) (Supplementary Fig. S7C). Hence, the amino acid signatures on the same structural scaffolds often vary in different animal classes. Finally, the similarity in amino acid signatures may also be used to predict the geographic sources of amphibian AMPs based on a careful classification of these peptides discovered on the six continents. For instance, we found the amino acid profile for the peptides studied by Dr Barra and her team [10] most resembling that for Europe (see Supplementary Fig. S8 for details). This block is designed to document our understanding of the SAR of AMPs. Peptides with the same sequence but different activities due to chemical modifications are described here (e.g. with and without C-terminal amidation). This information block stores data concerning peptide stability to heat, light, chemicals, and proteases, all in vitro. The APD6 included 33 peptides annotated as “heat-stable” and 3 examples for “not heat stable” AMPs. This is usually indicated by minimal MIC changes (<4-fold) before and after treatment. As a quantitative measurement, “half-life in vitro” records peptide stability in biological tissues (e.g. serum/plasma wound fluids, blood, and saliva). We annotated 18 peptides with half-life data. The search format for stability in human plasma is “half-life in vitro:plasma:human.” Although PK/PD studies are currently limited for AMPs, this block is reserved for pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD). We identified nine peptides with reported half-lives in mice. The search format is “in vivo PK:mouse.” For convenience, red blood cells (RBCs) are most widely utilized for toxicity evaluation in vitro. Different blood cells and 50% hemolytic concentration (HC50) are also included. To date, 335 peptides are annotated using “human RBC,” 47 with “sheep RBC,” 9 with “chicken RBC,” and 9 with “pig RBC.” These classifications will allow users to retrieve data from the same blood cells such as human RBC to minimize cell-type differences. Cytotoxicity data for other mammalian cells are also included here. We compared hemolytic (HC50 < 100 μM) and nonhemolytic peptides (Supplementary Fig. S9). Remarkably, nonhemolytic AMPs (HC50 > 100 μM) had higher G, K, and R amino acids, while the hemolytic group showed higher hydrophobic I, L, F, and C. Correspondingly, the hemolytic group is characterized by a higher hydrophobic ratio (50.9%) than that of nonhemolytic group (44.6%). “Toxicity mechanism,” when reported, is included in a subsequent block. Although not always thoroughly tested, the toxicity data can include weight loss, maximum tolerated dose, tissue histology, blood cell counts, and kidney chemistry [45]. A search of “in vivo toxicity” returned 21 peptides. The testing subject can be searched by using the standard format: “in vivo toxicity:mouse” (12 entries edited). We started this registration in the APD3 [30]. Of 205 peptides with information for “animal model,” 148 studies used mice (animal model:mouse). Other animal models such as “rabbit,” “cattle,” “wax moth,” and “Caenorhabditis elegans” are depicted in Fig. 3F. Large-scale peptide production (kg to tons) is required for practical use, including clinical trials. While small peptides (<30 aa) are suitable for chemical synthesis, DNA recombinant technology is especially important for AMPs with longer sequences and posttranslational modifications. In the APD6, the average length of all the recombinantly expressed AMPs is 48.25 aa, while the average length for all synthetic AMPs is 19.09 aa. We obtained 245 entries from the search of “recombinant production” (177 using bacteria and 68 using yeast). The search format is “recombinant production:bacteria:Escherichia coli” (149 AMPs) and “recombinant production:yeast:Pichia pastoris” (62 peptides). Plant and insect expression systems can be searched in the same format (Fig. 3G). Formulation provides a useful approach to increase the likelihood of in vivo success due to increased peptide stability, targeted delivery, and controlled release. The APD6 has included 14 such examples. Initially created in the name field of the APD2, topical or systemic clinical trials are an integral part of the AMP information pipeline and can be searched via Add Info (16 found). Classic examples are OP-145, MBI 226, pexiganan, and iseganan derived from LL-37, indolicidin, magainin, and PG-1, respectively [1, 2]. While the clinically tested cationic AMPs mentioned above have not yet been approved to treat patients, two gene-coded bacteriocins (nisin and pediocin PA-1) and one antimicrobial protein lysozyme are utilized as food preservatives. To inspire the development of AMPs into novel antibiotics, the APD also included a few peptide antibiotics already in clinical use. These nonribosomal peptides include gramicidin A, gramicidin S, colistin, polymyxin B, and daptomycin. The APD6 also includes nonclassical treatment methods, including peptide inducers (e.g. sunlight, vitamin D, and short-chain fatty acids), vector delivery for peptide expression, and histone deacetylase inhibitors [51–53]. In summary, the establishment of the AMPIP is an important step toward AI discovery of future peptide antibiotics. Newly annotated positive and negative datasets for predictions of more robust peptides can be retrieved in the Add Info (just described). With the accumulation of more data, in vivo prediction will become possible as well. Like the current activity prediction [16, 17, 19, 20], a set of top candidates from each AI prediction will be selected for experimental validation. The early competition underscores that database construction from scratch is a challenging task. It took a decade to arrive at the matured APD3 platform with wide applications in research and education [30, 32]. Natural AMPs accumulated in the APD over 20 years constitute a core dataset for us to understand nature’s design principles, for peptide classification, design, and prediction (Supplementary Fig. S10). It took another decade to systematically explore and organize additional information concerning AMPs into a pipeline in the APD6 (Fig. 3A). With the continuation of the APD odyssey, an efficient and effective pipeline of AI predictors may be built based on this unique information pipeline for novel antibiotic discovery in silico, thereby minimizing the use of research resources, including human labor and experimental animals (see the Graphical abstract). Finally, our expanded wheel of peptide functions in the APD6 (Supplementary Table S2) may open new opportunities for developing other types of peptide therapeutics (e.g. antidiabetic, anticancer, and antiviral drugs) as well. Supplementary data is available at NAR online. None declared. This study was supported by the past and current National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants GM138552 from National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) and AI175209 from National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). All contents of the APD6 are manually inspected and curated. All the information required to use the APD6 is included in the article and its supporting information. Updated raw data can be obtained online via the APD6 at https://aps.unmc.edu. Based on the APD search, structural coordinates can be downloaded from the PDB [22]. A list of peptide sequences from any APD search can be downloaded in the FASTA format. The systematic classification of natural, synthetic, and predicted AMPs in the APD6 enriches the peptide lists one can obtain for research and development. For convenience, lists of amino acid sequences for selected natural groups over 100 entries have been uploaded in the APD6 Downloads website. However, the fair use of the database information does not include the right of copying the APD to set up a competing database.