Antimicrobial agents based on peptides are commonly referred to as antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). These are mainly small cationic peptides, and due to their rapid action-killing and broad-spectrum activity, AMPs have gained attention as promising antimicrobials over conventional agents [1]. AMPs exhibit high potency as antibacterial [2], antifungal [3], antiviral [1], antiparasitic [4], and even demonstrate anti-cancerous properties [1]. AMPs with diverse modes of action are promising candidates for addressing the challenges of antimicrobial resistance. Most characterized AMPs inhibit growth or kill microbial pathogens in a membrane-disruptive manner by following either carpet, toroidal, or barrel stave models [1], which are governed by their physicochemical and structural properties. Typically, AMPs’ affinity towards the cell membrane depends on several molecular factors, including the charge of the membrane, the nature of AMPs, the lipid composition of the membrane [5, 6], and the ratio of AMPs to the lipid membrane [6]. The selectivity of AMPs is also partly determined by their physicochemical properties. Different preferences in the interactions of positively charged AMPs with negatively charged microbial cell membranes and zwitterionic mammalian membranes are well-established [6]. Various physicochemical parameters of peptides, such as net charge and hydrophobicity, govern the initial interactions of AMPs with the other AMPs and membranes in a complex cumulative manner [6, 7]. Additionally, the role of other factors, including in vitro aggregation, in vivo aggregation, the angle subtended by hydrophobic residues, disordered conformation propensity, penetration depth (PD), tilt angle, helicity, etc., were also shown to be important [8, 9]. Nevertheless, the limited understanding of the physicochemical and structural properties of AMPs and their significance in AMP-membrane interactions and action mechanisms highlight the existing knowledge gap. Currently, the Antimicrobial Peptide Database (https://aps.unmc.edu/AP/) contains over 5099 AMPs. Despite increasing interest in these peptide-based drugs, only a small number of AMPs have successfully transitioned into clinical use [1]. The limited successes could be attributed to several AMP-associated challenges, such as low proteolytic stability, high cost of production, and toxicities, with hemolytic activity being a significant concern [1, 10]. These limitations are generally addressed by creating AMP variants with enhanced antimicrobial efficacy and minimum toxicity through substituting amino acid residues, reducing the size of parent AMPs, or through sequence-structure-based analysis [11]. However, such trial-and-error approaches alter the peptide’s physicochemical and structural properties. Prior studies also applied machine learning methods in integration with freely available online databases with large peptide libraries and molecular knowledge, particularly on peptide-membrane interactions [12]. These approaches were applied to predict peptide properties that classify, identify, and/or rationally design intracellular AMPs with minimal toxicity. These strategies often lack a systematic study to define precise key physicochemical parameters and their significance for developing non-toxic and effective AMPs, which remains challenging. Another category of cationic peptides, namely cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) are considered as potential drug carrier candidates. CPPs enter cells by crossing the membrane and can transport a therapeutic molecule inside cells, and only a select few show antimicrobial activities [13]. Similar to hemolytic peptides (HPs), the majority of AMPs act by damaging the cell membrane, leading to cell lysis. Contrary to most AMPs and HPs, the majority of CPPs exhibit minimal hemolytic activity [13]. An in-depth understanding of the HPs and CPPs properties in the context of AMPs is imperative for unraveling the critical factors for the functionalities of these peptides, both individually as well as in combination. To address existing knowledge gaps, this study proposes a ‘holistic’ approach by integrating the physicochemical and structural properties of AMPs, CPPs, and HPs to identify both unique and shared critical factors and their optimal values for designing effective and non-toxic AMPs. This multifaceted investigation comprises peptide data mining, functionality-based categorization of peptide datasets, and the predictive and statistical analyses of peptide properties. Additionally, the study elucidates the relative significance of key descriptors and their correlation with antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and non-hemolytic properties. Our findings explain why HPs and most AMPs act through membrane disruption, while CPPs employ non-membranolytic mechanisms. This study offers valuable insights into the rational identification and strategic design of AMPs with therapeutic potential. Sequences for AMPs, nAMPs, CPPs, non-cell-penetrating peptides (nCHPs), HPs, and non-hemolytic peptides (nHPs) were obtained from various public depositories (Table 1, Tables S1–S6). For AMP dataset, antibacterial, antifungal, and/or antiviral properties were used. The sequences were processed by removing duplicates and incomplete entries. Peptides containing D-amino acids or modifications at the N- or C-terminus were also excluded from the peptide datasets. Finally, only peptides between 7 and 35 residues in length were retained (a total of 3697 peptides) were selected. For all peptide groups, only experimentally validated peptides were used except for nCPPs and nAMPs. For nCPPs and nAMPs datasets, due to the limited availability of peptides entries, both experimentally validated and randomly generated peptides, while, for nAMPs, only randomly generated peptides were used. Details of peptide data mining from different databases. At least two established prediction tools were employed to assess the antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities of processed peptide datasets. For antimicrobial properties, AMPscanner v2 [20], and CAMPR4 [21], were used, and MLCPP 2.0 [22] and CPPred-RF [23] databases were used for predicting cell-penetrating properties. For hemolytic activity of peptides, prediction tools HLPpred-Fuse [19] and HAPPENN [24] were used (Table 2). Based on prediction probabilities, peptide datasets were classified as functional (AMPs, CPPs, and HPs) and non-functional (nAMPs, nCPPs, and nHPs) datasets, where 0 and 1 were considered as their lowest and highest values, respectively. The prediction accuracies of web tools were calculated by considering the positive and negative datasets using the following formula [25]. List of tools used for predicting functional and physicochemical properties of peptides. aASHR = angle subtended by hydrophobic residues, bDCP = disorder confirmation propensity where TP: true positive, TN: true negative, FP: false positive, and FN: false negative. A total of 3026 peptides were segregated into AMPs, nAMPs, CPPs, nCPPs, HPs, and nHPs, and 18 physicochemical parameters were computed for each peptide. Factors like net charge, isoelectric points, normalized hydrophobic moment, linear moment, amphiphilicity index (AI), peptide length, PD, and tilt angle were calculated by the DBAASP [15]. A helical wheel model of the polypeptide chain in the ideal α-helical approximation was used to compute the angle subtended by hydrophobic residues (ASHR) [15]. The α-helix, β-sheet, β-turn, amylo, and in vitro aggregation propensities were calculated by TANGO web tool (http://tango.crg.es/) [27]. Further, the AGGRESCAN [28] and ProtParam (https://web.expasy.org/protparam/) [26] tools were used to calculate in vivo aggregation propensity and GRAVY (Grand Average of Hydropathy) values, respectively. For selected peptides, the helical wheel projection was generated by HeliQuest [29]. Details of the prediction tools used in this study are listed in Table 2. For functional or positive (AMPs, CPPs, HPs) and non-functional or negative (nAMPs, nCPPs, nHPs) peptide datasets, predicted properties (Table 2) were used for training the Random Forest model [30]. A total of 3026 peptides were utilized, with 70% allocated for training the model and 30% for validation. Five-fold cross-validation was performed to evaluate the model’s performance, and the results were assessed using various performance metrics (Table S8). The feature importance across all cross-validation folds were calculated and their averaged values were compared with those from the training dataset. An optimal decision threshold was calculated from the validation ROC curve by maximizing the difference between the True Positive Rate and False Positive Rate. The prediction tools AMPscanner v2, MLCPP 2.0, and HAPPENN with calculated high prediction accuracies for AMPs, CPPs, and HPs were used for making clusters based on the peptide’s functionality, where the cut-off value for the predicted activities was kept at ≥0.49, ≥ 0.74, and ≥ 0.64, respectively. The standard error, or mean ± standard deviation, was used to express the data. The 0.1% ROUT (Robust Regression and Outlier Removal) method was used to remove outliers [31] and the clean data were used for descriptive analysis using GraphPad v10.3.3. Normality test of data was carried out through the Shapiro–Wilk Test [32], Kolmogorov–Smirnov Test [33], and Anderson-Darling Test [34]. While comparing three or more groups, the statistical significance of the results was assessed using the Kruskal–Wallis test [35] with Dunn’s post-hoc pairwise t-test [36], P < 0.05 was considered significant These statistical tests were performed using GraphPad v10.3.3. Functional activity was correlated with physicochemical and structural parameters using Pearson’s correlation, and significant factors were identified with the built-in Random Forest algorithm within the Corrplot package [37]. Sequences for AMPs, nAMPs, CPPs, non-cell-penetrating peptides (nCHPs), HPs, and non-hemolytic peptides (nHPs) were obtained from various public depositories (Table 1, Tables S1–S6). For AMP dataset, antibacterial, antifungal, and/or antiviral properties were used. The sequences were processed by removing duplicates and incomplete entries. Peptides containing D-amino acids or modifications at the N- or C-terminus were also excluded from the peptide datasets. Finally, only peptides between 7 and 35 residues in length were retained (a total of 3697 peptides) were selected. For all peptide groups, only experimentally validated peptides were used except for nCPPs and nAMPs. For nCPPs and nAMPs datasets, due to the limited availability of peptides entries, both experimentally validated and randomly generated peptides, while, for nAMPs, only randomly generated peptides were used. Details of peptide data mining from different databases. At least two established prediction tools were employed to assess the antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities of processed peptide datasets. For antimicrobial properties, AMPscanner v2 [20], and CAMPR4 [21], were used, and MLCPP 2.0 [22] and CPPred-RF [23] databases were used for predicting cell-penetrating properties. For hemolytic activity of peptides, prediction tools HLPpred-Fuse [19] and HAPPENN [24] were used (Table 2). Based on prediction probabilities, peptide datasets were classified as functional (AMPs, CPPs, and HPs) and non-functional (nAMPs, nCPPs, and nHPs) datasets, where 0 and 1 were considered as their lowest and highest values, respectively. The prediction accuracies of web tools were calculated by considering the positive and negative datasets using the following formula [25]. List of tools used for predicting functional and physicochemical properties of peptides. aASHR = angle subtended by hydrophobic residues, bDCP = disorder confirmation propensity where TP: true positive, TN: true negative, FP: false positive, and FN: false negative. A total of 3026 peptides were segregated into AMPs, nAMPs, CPPs, nCPPs, HPs, and nHPs, and 18 physicochemical parameters were computed for each peptide. Factors like net charge, isoelectric points, normalized hydrophobic moment, linear moment, amphiphilicity index (AI), peptide length, PD, and tilt angle were calculated by the DBAASP [15]. A helical wheel model of the polypeptide chain in the ideal α-helical approximation was used to compute the angle subtended by hydrophobic residues (ASHR) [15]. The α-helix, β-sheet, β-turn, amylo, and in vitro aggregation propensities were calculated by TANGO web tool (http://tango.crg.es/) [27]. Further, the AGGRESCAN [28] and ProtParam (https://web.expasy.org/protparam/) [26] tools were used to calculate in vivo aggregation propensity and GRAVY (Grand Average of Hydropathy) values, respectively. For selected peptides, the helical wheel projection was generated by HeliQuest [29]. Details of the prediction tools used in this study are listed in Table 2. For functional or positive (AMPs, CPPs, HPs) and non-functional or negative (nAMPs, nCPPs, nHPs) peptide datasets, predicted properties (Table 2) were used for training the Random Forest model [30]. A total of 3026 peptides were utilized, with 70% allocated for training the model and 30% for validation. Five-fold cross-validation was performed to evaluate the model’s performance, and the results were assessed using various performance metrics (Table S8). The feature importance across all cross-validation folds were calculated and their averaged values were compared with those from the training dataset. An optimal decision threshold was calculated from the validation ROC curve by maximizing the difference between the True Positive Rate and False Positive Rate. The prediction tools AMPscanner v2, MLCPP 2.0, and HAPPENN with calculated high prediction accuracies for AMPs, CPPs, and HPs were used for making clusters based on the peptide’s functionality, where the cut-off value for the predicted activities was kept at ≥0.49, ≥ 0.74, and ≥ 0.64, respectively. The standard error, or mean ± standard deviation, was used to express the data. The 0.1% ROUT (Robust Regression and Outlier Removal) method was used to remove outliers [31] and the clean data were used for descriptive analysis using GraphPad v10.3.3. Normality test of data was carried out through the Shapiro–Wilk Test [32], Kolmogorov–Smirnov Test [33], and Anderson-Darling Test [34]. While comparing three or more groups, the statistical significance of the results was assessed using the Kruskal–Wallis test [35] with Dunn’s post-hoc pairwise t-test [36], P < 0.05 was considered significant These statistical tests were performed using GraphPad v10.3.3. Functional activity was correlated with physicochemical and structural parameters using Pearson’s correlation, and significant factors were identified with the built-in Random Forest algorithm within the Corrplot package [37]. The study focuses on the identification and evaluation of distinct physicochemical and structural factors to determine their relative importance in defining the functional properties of AMPs, CPPs, and HPs, individually and in combination (Fig. 1). A total of 15 602 peptide sequences for six groups were obtained from various databases (Table 1). To improve data quality, peptides consisting of L-amino acid residues were retained for further analysis. Smaller peptides, typically 7–35 residues long, are more flexible and have disordered structures. This range enhances diffusion, reduces immunogenicity, and optimizes antimicrobial activity, stability, and safety, making these peptides highly effective antimicrobial agents. The pre-processed dataset of 3697 peptides, included AMPs (435), CPPs (430), HPs (525), nAMPs (1076), nCPPs (761), and nHPs (470). The antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities were predicted for a pre-processed dataset using at least two tools, and their prediction accuracies were determined (Fig. 2). For antimicrobial activity, AMPscanner v2 showed a significantly higher prediction accuracy of 78.09% compared to CAMPR4 (76.83%). Similarly, the MLCPP 2.0 program showed a higher prediction accuracy of 92.44% for cell-penetrating properties than CPPred-RF (72.71%); while the HAPPENN and HLPpred-Fuse programs resulted in 84.69% and 78.95% prediction accuracies, respectively for hemolytic activity (Fig. 2A). Based on the prediction accuracies, AMPscannerV2, MLCPP2.0, and HAPPENN tools were selected for predicting antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities, respectively (Fig. 2B). Total outliers for each group were found as 13.56% AMPs, 25.7% nAMPs, 9.1% CPPs, 6.07% nCPPs, 10.30% HPs, and 20.89% nHPs, which were removed for subsequent analysis. Peptides having prediction probabilities above 0.5 for antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities were selected. The proceeded dataset showed lower standard deviation values (Fig. 2B). The mean values for AMPs, CPPs, and HPs increased from 0.6 to 0.9 and decreased for the nAMPs, nCPPs, and nHPs from 0.4 to 0.2. The generated processed datasets of 3026 peptides were categorized as AMPs (376), CPPs (402), and HPs (371), whereas peptides with prediction values below 0.5 were labelled as non-AMPs (nAMPs, 804), non-CPPs (nCPPs, 702), and non-HPs (nHPs, 371) (Table 1). The generated processed datasets for six peptide groups were used for all further studies. A schematic representation of the workflow used in this study. The amino acid sequences of AMPs, nAMPs, CPPs, nCPPs, HPs, and nHPs were mined, processed, and predicted for functional properties to categorize peptides into six groups and three clusters. Peptide datasets were subjected to predictive and statistical analyses. The Random Forest algorithm was applied to identify the relative importance of various parameters and their associations with the antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and non-hemolytic properties. Predictions of antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities of six peptide groups. Panel A illustrates profiles of prediction databases used for the six peptide groups, while panel B depicts analyses of peptide datasets of AMPs, nAMPs, CPPs, nCPPs, HPs, and nHPs. The top, middle, and bottom panels represent predictions for antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities. The AMP activity was predicted by AMP Scanner v2 [20] and CAMPR4 [21]. For the prediction of CPP activity, MLCPP 2.0 [22] and CPPred-RF [23] tools were used, and hemolytic activity was predicted by HAPPENN [24] and HLPpred-Fuse [19] tools. The differences in standard deviation values were plotted, and the middle line represents the median values. The physicochemical parameters predicted for each peptide in six groups were analysed followed by their descriptive statistical analysis (Fig. 3). The calculated mean, median, and 95% confidence interval values are listed in Table S7. Further, to identify crucial molecular descriptors for AMPs, CPPs, and nHPs, the data were evaluated to compare the predicted properties of functional peptide groups AMPs, CPPs, and HPs with each other as well as with their respective non-active groups nAMPs, nCPPs, and nHPs. The net charge and isoelectric point varied significantly discriminating between the functional and non-functional groups (Fig. 3A and B). The mean net charge for HPs, AMPs, and CPPs were determined as 3.3, 4.5, and 5.7 respectively, and the former two groups showed a lower isoelectric point of 10.9 and 10.5, compared to CPPs (11.8). Furthermore, the mean GRAVY indices varied considerably between AMPs/nAMPs, CPPs/nCPPs, and HPs/nHPs (Table S7, Fig. 3C). Our findings revealed that HPs with the highest (0.51) and CPPs with the lowest (−1.1) mean GRAVY values (Table S7) are rich in hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues, respectively, suggesting hydrophobicity is a more critical factor for HPs than net charge. Prediction of physicochemical parameters and their comparative analyses for peptide groups. Panels A–L display parameters predicted for peptide groups AMPs, nAMPs, CPPs, nCPPs, HPs, and nHPs predicted (Table 2). Net charge, isoelectric point (pI), GRAVY, hydrophobic moment (μH), PD, linear moment (μL), and in vitro aggregation, ASHR (angle subtended by hydrophobic residues), propensity, and PD are determined as critical discriminatory factors. The data were analysed using the Kruskal–Wallis test [35] with Dunn’s post-hoc analysis. One-way ANOVA analysis was performed between and among the peptide groups. The ***, **, and * mark strips at P > 0.5 indicate highly significant, moderately significant, and slightly significant results, respectively. Next, we predicted the peptide’s disordered conformation propensity (DCP), which is inversely related to the peptide’s flexibility and directly to its probability of forming a rigid secondary structure [15]. Mean DCP values were found to be significantly different for CPPs (−0.43) and nCPPs (0.2) (Fig. 3D) and were significantly higher for AMPs (0.02) and HPs (0.25). Additionally, amphiphilicity indices of amino acid, which directly govern a peptide’s transmembrane helix propensity aiding cell penetration [15], were predicted. Interestingly, the highest mean AI of amino acid was found for CPPs (1.6) (Fig. 3E and Table S7), indicating a higher propensity of CPPs to form transmembrane helices for entering cells without membrane disruption. Our findings revealed that net charge, hydrophobicity, DCP, and amphiphilicity indices are the most important factors for differentiating the AMPs, CPPs, and HPs from their non-functional counterparts. Further, findings based on DCP, amphiphilicity indices, and in vitro and in vivo aggregation values suggest that CPPs tend to possess more disordered or flexible structures that aid in their cellular entry. Conversely, AMPs and HPs may be relatively less flexible or more rigid to perform membranolytic activity. The hydrophobic moment (μH) is one of the most important factors in governing antimicrobial activity [38]. It is calculated based on the hydrophobicity of amino acids and their positions along the helix axis, which quantifies the amphiphilicity of the helix. As shown in Fig. 3(F), μH significantly discriminated AMPs and HPs, from nAMPs and nAHPs, respectively. Notably, AMPs and HPs had the highest mean μH of 1.2, while it was 0.8 for CPPs, suggesting that the hydrophobic moment may be directly related to the peptide’s hemolytic and antimicrobial properties. In general, a high hydrophobic moment value indicates a more amphipathic helix, perpendicular to its axis, with implications for interactions with membranes and other molecules. However, in comparison to hydrophobic moment, GRAVY was found to be a superior discriminator for AMPs and HPs. Further, all six peptide groups showed a mean linear moment (μL) in the range of 0.27 to 0.31, where AMPs and HPs showed almost similar mean linear moments of 0.27 and 0.25, respectively (Fig. 3G). Thus, suggesting that both AMPs and HPs groups exhibit similar levels of separation of hydrophobic and hydrophilic parts along the peptide chain [9]. Further, we calculated ASHR, which quantifies the separation of hydrophobic and hydrophilic parts of α-helix peptides [38]. AMPs and HPs showed a 1.5-fold higher mean ASHR than nAMPs and nHPs, respectively. In contrast, CPPs showed insignificant differences than nCPPs (Table S7 and Fig. 3H). Furthermore, the ASHR also influences antimicrobial and cytolytic activities [38]. Interestingly, HPs showed a relatively larger ASHR of 99 followed by AMPs (81) and CPPs (55), suggesting that, unlike AMPs and CPPS, the peptide group of HPs has a relatively higher hydrophobic portion exposed to the cell membrane for peptide-membrane interactions. Moreover, the peptide’s interaction with the membrane also depends on its orientation on the cell membrane, which is governed by various factors, including PD and tilt angle [9]. HPs showed the lowest PD (13.10), and both CPPs and nHPs showed equal PD (20) (Table S5; Fig. 3I), which indicates that HPs are more likely to be at the membrane and might follow a carpet-like mechanism. Another structural parameter is PPII coil propensities (Fig. 3K), which showed significant discriminators for peptides with antimicrobial and hemolytic activities, whereas it was found insignificant for CPPs/nCPPs, respectively. Since the antimicrobial activity of a peptide is also governed by its in vitro (in solution) and in vivo aggregation (at membrane surface) behaviours [8], we further analysed these factors. CPPs showed almost zero dispersion for in vitro aggregation propensity, whereas AMPs and HPs showed a slightly higher variation (3.54 to 8.0) for in vitro aggregation (Fig. 3L). Further, CPPs showed a significantly lower in vivo aggregation value of −26 compared to AMPs (6) and HPs (21), suggesting less aggregation of CPPs in biological environments (Fig. 4A). Unlike CPPs, higher in vivo aggregation propensities of HPs may aggregate at cell membrane surfaces, facilitating their action of membrane disruption and subsequent cell lysis. The structural and in vivo aggregation properties of peptide groups. Panel A illustrates in vivo aggregation for AMPs, CPPs, and HPs. Panels B–D depict the helical, β-sheet, and β-turn configurations for six peptide groups. The structural and aggregation parameters were calculated using the TANGO [27] and AGGRESCAN [28] tools. The computed Na4vSS values represent the average aggregation propensity over the entire sequence divided by the number of residues and multiplied by 100. The data were analysed using the Kruskal–Wallis test [35] with Dunn’s post-hoc analysis [36] between and among the groups. The ***, **, and * mark strips at P < 0.5 represent highly significant, moderately significant, and slightly significant, respectively. Furthermore, we investigated the importance of α-helix, β-sheet, and β-turn properties for different peptide groups (Fig. 4B–D). All these factors varied significantly for CPPs and nCPPs, where nCPPs showed higher β-sheet, α-helix, and β-turn propensities than functional CPPs. For AMPs/nAMPs and HPs/nHPs groups, α-helix and β-turn were highly significant discriminators (Fig. 4C–D). Moreover, unlike nCPPs, CPPs showed significantly lower β-turn propensities, supporting prior reports of β-turn conformation to have a direct and inverse relationship with membrane-lytic activity and cell-penetrating properties, respectively [39]. Our results suggest that CPPs with minimal aggregation onto the membrane and higher structural flexibility follow a non-membrane lytic mechanism to enter cells [39, 40]. Based on predictive, statistical, and comparative analysis, we identified critical parameters for distinguishing functional peptides from their non-functional peptide groups. Factors such as isoelectric point, GRAVY, DCP, and in vitro aggregation were common and highly significant in distinguishing functional from non-functional peptide groups (Fig. 3). For AMPs/nAMPs and HPs/nHPs, hydrophobic moment, ASHR, linear moment, and PD varied significantly between functional and nonfunctional groups. Additionally, net charge, AI, and β-turn content were highly significant for AMPs/nAMPs and CPPs/nCPPs. Notably, compared to AMPs/nAMPs and HPs/nHPs, β-sheet content emerged as a critical discriminator for CPPs/nCPPs. The comparative analysis among functional peptide groups showed GRAVY, isoelectric point, PD, disordered conformation, and in vitro aggregation propensities were identified as key discriminators for AMPs/CPPs, AMPs/HPs and CPPs/HPs (Table S7; Figs 3 and 4A). Additionally, for CPPs/HPs, in vivo aggregation propensities, and for CPPs/AMPs an AI varied significantly. For AMPs/HPs, hydrophobic moment, ASHR, linear moment, and PPII coil propensity were significant. Besides, net charge was the marginally important factor for both CPPs/HPs and CPPs/AMPs, while net charge varied insignificantly for AMPs/HPs. Our findings of the critical molecular descriptors reveal structural and compositional distinctions among AMPs, CPPs, HPs, and their non-functional peptide groups, providing potential indicators for peptide functionality. The peptide dataset, consisting of 3026 entries, was categorized into three clusters: ACs, nACs, and AC-nHPs (Fig. 5, left panel). This categorization was performed based on optimized cut-off values generated using the Random Forest algorithm, as explained later. The cluster ACs consist of peptides with antimicrobial and cell-penetrating properties and their negative counterparts in nACs. The third cluster of AC-nHPs contained peptides with antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and non-hemolytic properties (Fig. 5, left panel). The generation of the cluster AC-nHPs delineated factors crucial for identifying or creating non-toxic AMPs capable of entering cells without disrupting cell membranes (Fig. 5, right panel). Further, we predicted and statistically analysed physicochemical and structural factors for all clusters (Fig. 5A–L, Table S7). Our findings showed both net charge and isoelectric points varied significantly upon comparing clusters ACs and AC-nHPs with the nACs (Fig. 5A and B). Remarkably, AC-nHPs showed three to four times lower GRAVY than nACs (Fig. 5C), suggesting that AMPs with cell-penetrating and non-hemolytic properties tend to have lower hydrophobicity (Table S7). Moreover, clusters of ACs and AC-nHPs showed DCP mean values of −0.39 and −0.45, respectively, while it was 0.18 for nACs (Fig. 5D), thus suggesting a negative DCP value is critical for the peptide to have antimicrobial and cell-penetrating properties and further lower for cell-entering antimicrobial and non-hemolytic peptides. Clustering peptide datasets using the Random Forest algorithm and predictions of molecular descriptors. The left panel shows ACs, nACs, and AC-nHPs clusters with different properties. The ACs cluster contains 447 peptides, nACs include 1413 non-antimicrobial and non-cell-penetrating peptides, and AC-nHPs contain 399 peptides. Physicochemical properties determined for peptide clusters (right panel) showed significant differences among various parameters. The data were analysed using the Kruskal–Wallis test [35] with Dunn’s post-hoc analysis [36] between and among the groups. Significant data were represented as a *mark strip at P < 0.5 on the plots. Further, ACs and AC-nHPs showed almost similar hydrophobic moment values, around 1.5 times higher than nACs (Table S7, Fig. 5E), and two-fold higher amphiphilicity values were obtained for clusters ACs and AC-nHPs (Table S7, Fig. 5F). Besides, ASHR values were 1.3-fold higher for the cluster AC-nHPs than nACs (Fig. 5G), whereas lower PD was found in AC-nHPs (19.7) than nACs (22) (Fig. 5H). Clusters AC-nHPs and ACs were highly significant for in vitro aggregation (Fig. 5I) and PPII coil (Fig. 5J) compared to nACs. For peptide length, the AC-nHPs cluster varied significantly from nACs (Fig. 5K), whereas the linear moment was an insignificant factor for all clusters (Fig. 5L). Next, we employed the Random Forest method to evaluate the relative importance of various parameters for identifying the properties associated with antimicrobial, cell penetration, and non-hemolysis activity. The Random Forest model performed excellently across all sets—training, validation, and test—with consistent accuracy, F1 scores, and AUC metrics (Table S8). Overall, minimal overfitting was demonstrated, with accuracy and F1 score differences between training and test sets well within acceptable thresholds (< 5%). The consistent and robust performance on the test set suggests that this model can be used reliably for real-life classification tasks, where the ability to distinguish between classes with high accuracy and precision is critical. The K-fold cross-validation with five-fold led to the determination of the optimal thresholds by maximizing the difference between the true positive and false positive rates. The optimal thresholds for distinguishing functional peptides (AMPs, CPPs, and HPs) from non-functional parts were determined as 0.49, 0.71, and 0.64, respectively (Table S8). Further, the average feature importance across all cross-validation folds differed by less than 5% from the corresponding feature importance in the training dataset, indicating consistency and reliability of feature importance across datasets. In addition, the trained Random Forest model showed a high prediction accuracy of 94.7% on an external (unseen) experimental dataset of peptides (Table S9), correctly classifying 54 out of 57 samples, demonstrating the model’s robustness and reliability for application to external datasets. AMPs showed higher importance for net charge, isoelectric point, and hydrophobic moment, while for CPPs, net charge, isoelectric point, and AI were the most critical factors. In ACs cluster, net charge, isoelectric point, and AI were the key variables. For non-HPs, the most important variables were identified as in vitro aggregation (Fig. 6, left panel). Remarkably, for cluster AC-nHPs containing peptides with antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and non-hemolytic properties, factors including AI, disordered confirmation propensity, in vitro aggregation, net charge, and isoelectric points were identified as critical features (Fig. 6, left panel; Fig. S2). These findings illustrate that identified factors displaying higher variable importance are critical in discriminating peptides based on their functionalities. Application of the Random Forest algorithm to assess the molecular descriptors and their associations with the functional properties of peptides. Panel A shows the variable importance of the molecular descriptors for the peptide groups AMPs, CPPs, nHPs, and cluster AC-nHPs. Panel B illustrates Pearson’s correlation coefficient matrix of cluster AC-nHPs, where the bar on the right indicates the proportion of positive (blue) and negative (red) correlations. The coefficient values range from 1 to −1, where 1 and − 1 indicate a perfect positive and negative linear relationship, respectively, whereas 0 indicates no linear relationship. The circle size represents the magnitude of the correlation, with larger circles indicating stronger correlations. (A–C) cell-penetration, hemolytic, and antimicrobial activity is predicted by MLCPP 2.0, HAPPENN, and AMP Scanner v2, respectively, while D to P is hydrophobic moment, GRAVY, disordered conformation propensity, AI, the propensity to PPII coil, linear moment, tilt angle, net charge, isoelectric point, angle subtended by the hydrophobic residues, peptide length, propensity to in vitro aggregation, and PD, respectively. Pearson’s correlation and variable importance data were analysed using the built-in Random Forest algorithm with the Corrplot package in R [37]. The heatmap for the symmetric correlation matrix was created using the software GraphPad Prism v10.3.3. Further, we performed the correlation analysis among the peptide’s functional properties and molecular descriptors for cluster AC-nHPs (Fig. 6, right panel) and ACs and peptide group AMPs, CPPs, and nHPs (Fig. S1). The cluster AC-nHPs showed significant positive and negative correlations among various physicochemical and structural parameters. For these peptides, antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and non-hemolytic properties exhibited a moderate positive correlation with GRAVY and DCP, while tilt angle showed a negative correlation. In the cluster AC-nHPs, peptide length showed a moderate to low positive correlation with non-hemolytic, antimicrobial, and cell-penetrating properties. Peptide length parameters, hydrophobic moment, DCP, and GRAVY all exhibited a high positive association with one another. Conversely, these factors negatively correlate with the AI, isoelectric point, tilt angle, propensity for PPII coil formation, and ASHR. These findings of the key functional and molecular variables and their correlations provide a valuable perspective on the interplay between molecular descriptors and biological activities. Further, helical wheel projection analysis was performed for cluster AC-nHPs (Fig. 7). Helical wheel projections visually represent the arrangement of amino acids in a helical region, showing the distribution of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues along the helix. The visualization helps in identifying patterns like the orientation of hydrophobic amino acids towards the core of the α-helix peptide and polar amino acids towards the solvent-exposed surface. During membrane–AMP interactions, the high μH and ASHR of the peptide allow interaction of its hydrophobic phase with the cell membrane and membrane disruption [38]. Conversely, a helical peptide with a low hydrophobic phase, or μH value, enters cells without damaging the cell membrane. In contrast to HPs, most AC-nHPs do not adhere to the optimal peptide amphipathic structure, where either they lack or have a small hydrophobic phase that cannot break the cell membrane. Helical wheel projection of the AC-nHPs cluster. This projection highlights the distribution of charges and showcases hydrophilic, hydrophobic, positive and negative residues. Helical wheel projections were generated using the HeliQuest server [29]. An arrow at the helical wheel center depicts the hydrophobic moment’s direction. The majority of the peptides in the AC-nHPs cluster exhibit a non-hydrophobic phase, while a few display traces of a hydrophobic phase. The study focuses on the identification and evaluation of distinct physicochemical and structural factors to determine their relative importance in defining the functional properties of AMPs, CPPs, and HPs, individually and in combination (Fig. 1). A total of 15 602 peptide sequences for six groups were obtained from various databases (Table 1). To improve data quality, peptides consisting of L-amino acid residues were retained for further analysis. Smaller peptides, typically 7–35 residues long, are more flexible and have disordered structures. This range enhances diffusion, reduces immunogenicity, and optimizes antimicrobial activity, stability, and safety, making these peptides highly effective antimicrobial agents. The pre-processed dataset of 3697 peptides, included AMPs (435), CPPs (430), HPs (525), nAMPs (1076), nCPPs (761), and nHPs (470). The antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities were predicted for a pre-processed dataset using at least two tools, and their prediction accuracies were determined (Fig. 2). For antimicrobial activity, AMPscanner v2 showed a significantly higher prediction accuracy of 78.09% compared to CAMPR4 (76.83%). Similarly, the MLCPP 2.0 program showed a higher prediction accuracy of 92.44% for cell-penetrating properties than CPPred-RF (72.71%); while the HAPPENN and HLPpred-Fuse programs resulted in 84.69% and 78.95% prediction accuracies, respectively for hemolytic activity (Fig. 2A). Based on the prediction accuracies, AMPscannerV2, MLCPP2.0, and HAPPENN tools were selected for predicting antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities, respectively (Fig. 2B). Total outliers for each group were found as 13.56% AMPs, 25.7% nAMPs, 9.1% CPPs, 6.07% nCPPs, 10.30% HPs, and 20.89% nHPs, which were removed for subsequent analysis. Peptides having prediction probabilities above 0.5 for antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities were selected. The proceeded dataset showed lower standard deviation values (Fig. 2B). The mean values for AMPs, CPPs, and HPs increased from 0.6 to 0.9 and decreased for the nAMPs, nCPPs, and nHPs from 0.4 to 0.2. The generated processed datasets of 3026 peptides were categorized as AMPs (376), CPPs (402), and HPs (371), whereas peptides with prediction values below 0.5 were labelled as non-AMPs (nAMPs, 804), non-CPPs (nCPPs, 702), and non-HPs (nHPs, 371) (Table 1). The generated processed datasets for six peptide groups were used for all further studies. A schematic representation of the workflow used in this study. The amino acid sequences of AMPs, nAMPs, CPPs, nCPPs, HPs, and nHPs were mined, processed, and predicted for functional properties to categorize peptides into six groups and three clusters. Peptide datasets were subjected to predictive and statistical analyses. The Random Forest algorithm was applied to identify the relative importance of various parameters and their associations with the antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and non-hemolytic properties. Predictions of antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities of six peptide groups. Panel A illustrates profiles of prediction databases used for the six peptide groups, while panel B depicts analyses of peptide datasets of AMPs, nAMPs, CPPs, nCPPs, HPs, and nHPs. The top, middle, and bottom panels represent predictions for antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities. The AMP activity was predicted by AMP Scanner v2 [20] and CAMPR4 [21]. For the prediction of CPP activity, MLCPP 2.0 [22] and CPPred-RF [23] tools were used, and hemolytic activity was predicted by HAPPENN [24] and HLPpred-Fuse [19] tools. The differences in standard deviation values were plotted, and the middle line represents the median values. The physicochemical parameters predicted for each peptide in six groups were analysed followed by their descriptive statistical analysis (Fig. 3). The calculated mean, median, and 95% confidence interval values are listed in Table S7. Further, to identify crucial molecular descriptors for AMPs, CPPs, and nHPs, the data were evaluated to compare the predicted properties of functional peptide groups AMPs, CPPs, and HPs with each other as well as with their respective non-active groups nAMPs, nCPPs, and nHPs. The net charge and isoelectric point varied significantly discriminating between the functional and non-functional groups (Fig. 3A and B). The mean net charge for HPs, AMPs, and CPPs were determined as 3.3, 4.5, and 5.7 respectively, and the former two groups showed a lower isoelectric point of 10.9 and 10.5, compared to CPPs (11.8). Furthermore, the mean GRAVY indices varied considerably between AMPs/nAMPs, CPPs/nCPPs, and HPs/nHPs (Table S7, Fig. 3C). Our findings revealed that HPs with the highest (0.51) and CPPs with the lowest (−1.1) mean GRAVY values (Table S7) are rich in hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues, respectively, suggesting hydrophobicity is a more critical factor for HPs than net charge. Prediction of physicochemical parameters and their comparative analyses for peptide groups. Panels A–L display parameters predicted for peptide groups AMPs, nAMPs, CPPs, nCPPs, HPs, and nHPs predicted (Table 2). Net charge, isoelectric point (pI), GRAVY, hydrophobic moment (μH), PD, linear moment (μL), and in vitro aggregation, ASHR (angle subtended by hydrophobic residues), propensity, and PD are determined as critical discriminatory factors. The data were analysed using the Kruskal–Wallis test [35] with Dunn’s post-hoc analysis. One-way ANOVA analysis was performed between and among the peptide groups. The ***, **, and * mark strips at P > 0.5 indicate highly significant, moderately significant, and slightly significant results, respectively. Next, we predicted the peptide’s disordered conformation propensity (DCP), which is inversely related to the peptide’s flexibility and directly to its probability of forming a rigid secondary structure [15]. Mean DCP values were found to be significantly different for CPPs (−0.43) and nCPPs (0.2) (Fig. 3D) and were significantly higher for AMPs (0.02) and HPs (0.25). Additionally, amphiphilicity indices of amino acid, which directly govern a peptide’s transmembrane helix propensity aiding cell penetration [15], were predicted. Interestingly, the highest mean AI of amino acid was found for CPPs (1.6) (Fig. 3E and Table S7), indicating a higher propensity of CPPs to form transmembrane helices for entering cells without membrane disruption. Our findings revealed that net charge, hydrophobicity, DCP, and amphiphilicity indices are the most important factors for differentiating the AMPs, CPPs, and HPs from their non-functional counterparts. Further, findings based on DCP, amphiphilicity indices, and in vitro and in vivo aggregation values suggest that CPPs tend to possess more disordered or flexible structures that aid in their cellular entry. Conversely, AMPs and HPs may be relatively less flexible or more rigid to perform membranolytic activity. The hydrophobic moment (μH) is one of the most important factors in governing antimicrobial activity [38]. It is calculated based on the hydrophobicity of amino acids and their positions along the helix axis, which quantifies the amphiphilicity of the helix. As shown in Fig. 3(F), μH significantly discriminated AMPs and HPs, from nAMPs and nAHPs, respectively. Notably, AMPs and HPs had the highest mean μH of 1.2, while it was 0.8 for CPPs, suggesting that the hydrophobic moment may be directly related to the peptide’s hemolytic and antimicrobial properties. In general, a high hydrophobic moment value indicates a more amphipathic helix, perpendicular to its axis, with implications for interactions with membranes and other molecules. However, in comparison to hydrophobic moment, GRAVY was found to be a superior discriminator for AMPs and HPs. Further, all six peptide groups showed a mean linear moment (μL) in the range of 0.27 to 0.31, where AMPs and HPs showed almost similar mean linear moments of 0.27 and 0.25, respectively (Fig. 3G). Thus, suggesting that both AMPs and HPs groups exhibit similar levels of separation of hydrophobic and hydrophilic parts along the peptide chain [9]. Further, we calculated ASHR, which quantifies the separation of hydrophobic and hydrophilic parts of α-helix peptides [38]. AMPs and HPs showed a 1.5-fold higher mean ASHR than nAMPs and nHPs, respectively. In contrast, CPPs showed insignificant differences than nCPPs (Table S7 and Fig. 3H). Furthermore, the ASHR also influences antimicrobial and cytolytic activities [38]. Interestingly, HPs showed a relatively larger ASHR of 99 followed by AMPs (81) and CPPs (55), suggesting that, unlike AMPs and CPPS, the peptide group of HPs has a relatively higher hydrophobic portion exposed to the cell membrane for peptide-membrane interactions. Moreover, the peptide’s interaction with the membrane also depends on its orientation on the cell membrane, which is governed by various factors, including PD and tilt angle [9]. HPs showed the lowest PD (13.10), and both CPPs and nHPs showed equal PD (20) (Table S5; Fig. 3I), which indicates that HPs are more likely to be at the membrane and might follow a carpet-like mechanism. Another structural parameter is PPII coil propensities (Fig. 3K), which showed significant discriminators for peptides with antimicrobial and hemolytic activities, whereas it was found insignificant for CPPs/nCPPs, respectively. Since the antimicrobial activity of a peptide is also governed by its in vitro (in solution) and in vivo aggregation (at membrane surface) behaviours [8], we further analysed these factors. CPPs showed almost zero dispersion for in vitro aggregation propensity, whereas AMPs and HPs showed a slightly higher variation (3.54 to 8.0) for in vitro aggregation (Fig. 3L). Further, CPPs showed a significantly lower in vivo aggregation value of −26 compared to AMPs (6) and HPs (21), suggesting less aggregation of CPPs in biological environments (Fig. 4A). Unlike CPPs, higher in vivo aggregation propensities of HPs may aggregate at cell membrane surfaces, facilitating their action of membrane disruption and subsequent cell lysis. The structural and in vivo aggregation properties of peptide groups. Panel A illustrates in vivo aggregation for AMPs, CPPs, and HPs. Panels B–D depict the helical, β-sheet, and β-turn configurations for six peptide groups. The structural and aggregation parameters were calculated using the TANGO [27] and AGGRESCAN [28] tools. The computed Na4vSS values represent the average aggregation propensity over the entire sequence divided by the number of residues and multiplied by 100. The data were analysed using the Kruskal–Wallis test [35] with Dunn’s post-hoc analysis [36] between and among the groups. The ***, **, and * mark strips at P < 0.5 represent highly significant, moderately significant, and slightly significant, respectively. Furthermore, we investigated the importance of α-helix, β-sheet, and β-turn properties for different peptide groups (Fig. 4B–D). All these factors varied significantly for CPPs and nCPPs, where nCPPs showed higher β-sheet, α-helix, and β-turn propensities than functional CPPs. For AMPs/nAMPs and HPs/nHPs groups, α-helix and β-turn were highly significant discriminators (Fig. 4C–D). Moreover, unlike nCPPs, CPPs showed significantly lower β-turn propensities, supporting prior reports of β-turn conformation to have a direct and inverse relationship with membrane-lytic activity and cell-penetrating properties, respectively [39]. Our results suggest that CPPs with minimal aggregation onto the membrane and higher structural flexibility follow a non-membrane lytic mechanism to enter cells [39, 40]. Based on predictive, statistical, and comparative analysis, we identified critical parameters for distinguishing functional peptides from their non-functional peptide groups. Factors such as isoelectric point, GRAVY, DCP, and in vitro aggregation were common and highly significant in distinguishing functional from non-functional peptide groups (Fig. 3). For AMPs/nAMPs and HPs/nHPs, hydrophobic moment, ASHR, linear moment, and PD varied significantly between functional and nonfunctional groups. Additionally, net charge, AI, and β-turn content were highly significant for AMPs/nAMPs and CPPs/nCPPs. Notably, compared to AMPs/nAMPs and HPs/nHPs, β-sheet content emerged as a critical discriminator for CPPs/nCPPs. The comparative analysis among functional peptide groups showed GRAVY, isoelectric point, PD, disordered conformation, and in vitro aggregation propensities were identified as key discriminators for AMPs/CPPs, AMPs/HPs and CPPs/HPs (Table S7; Figs 3 and 4A). Additionally, for CPPs/HPs, in vivo aggregation propensities, and for CPPs/AMPs an AI varied significantly. For AMPs/HPs, hydrophobic moment, ASHR, linear moment, and PPII coil propensity were significant. Besides, net charge was the marginally important factor for both CPPs/HPs and CPPs/AMPs, while net charge varied insignificantly for AMPs/HPs. Our findings of the critical molecular descriptors reveal structural and compositional distinctions among AMPs, CPPs, HPs, and their non-functional peptide groups, providing potential indicators for peptide functionality. The peptide dataset, consisting of 3026 entries, was categorized into three clusters: ACs, nACs, and AC-nHPs (Fig. 5, left panel). This categorization was performed based on optimized cut-off values generated using the Random Forest algorithm, as explained later. The cluster ACs consist of peptides with antimicrobial and cell-penetrating properties and their negative counterparts in nACs. The third cluster of AC-nHPs contained peptides with antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and non-hemolytic properties (Fig. 5, left panel). The generation of the cluster AC-nHPs delineated factors crucial for identifying or creating non-toxic AMPs capable of entering cells without disrupting cell membranes (Fig. 5, right panel). Further, we predicted and statistically analysed physicochemical and structural factors for all clusters (Fig. 5A–L, Table S7). Our findings showed both net charge and isoelectric points varied significantly upon comparing clusters ACs and AC-nHPs with the nACs (Fig. 5A and B). Remarkably, AC-nHPs showed three to four times lower GRAVY than nACs (Fig. 5C), suggesting that AMPs with cell-penetrating and non-hemolytic properties tend to have lower hydrophobicity (Table S7). Moreover, clusters of ACs and AC-nHPs showed DCP mean values of −0.39 and −0.45, respectively, while it was 0.18 for nACs (Fig. 5D), thus suggesting a negative DCP value is critical for the peptide to have antimicrobial and cell-penetrating properties and further lower for cell-entering antimicrobial and non-hemolytic peptides. Clustering peptide datasets using the Random Forest algorithm and predictions of molecular descriptors. The left panel shows ACs, nACs, and AC-nHPs clusters with different properties. The ACs cluster contains 447 peptides, nACs include 1413 non-antimicrobial and non-cell-penetrating peptides, and AC-nHPs contain 399 peptides. Physicochemical properties determined for peptide clusters (right panel) showed significant differences among various parameters. The data were analysed using the Kruskal–Wallis test [35] with Dunn’s post-hoc analysis [36] between and among the groups. Significant data were represented as a *mark strip at P < 0.5 on the plots. Further, ACs and AC-nHPs showed almost similar hydrophobic moment values, around 1.5 times higher than nACs (Table S7, Fig. 5E), and two-fold higher amphiphilicity values were obtained for clusters ACs and AC-nHPs (Table S7, Fig. 5F). Besides, ASHR values were 1.3-fold higher for the cluster AC-nHPs than nACs (Fig. 5G), whereas lower PD was found in AC-nHPs (19.7) than nACs (22) (Fig. 5H). Clusters AC-nHPs and ACs were highly significant for in vitro aggregation (Fig. 5I) and PPII coil (Fig. 5J) compared to nACs. For peptide length, the AC-nHPs cluster varied significantly from nACs (Fig. 5K), whereas the linear moment was an insignificant factor for all clusters (Fig. 5L). Next, we employed the Random Forest method to evaluate the relative importance of various parameters for identifying the properties associated with antimicrobial, cell penetration, and non-hemolysis activity. The Random Forest model performed excellently across all sets—training, validation, and test—with consistent accuracy, F1 scores, and AUC metrics (Table S8). Overall, minimal overfitting was demonstrated, with accuracy and F1 score differences between training and test sets well within acceptable thresholds (< 5%). The consistent and robust performance on the test set suggests that this model can be used reliably for real-life classification tasks, where the ability to distinguish between classes with high accuracy and precision is critical. The K-fold cross-validation with five-fold led to the determination of the optimal thresholds by maximizing the difference between the true positive and false positive rates. The optimal thresholds for distinguishing functional peptides (AMPs, CPPs, and HPs) from non-functional parts were determined as 0.49, 0.71, and 0.64, respectively (Table S8). Further, the average feature importance across all cross-validation folds differed by less than 5% from the corresponding feature importance in the training dataset, indicating consistency and reliability of feature importance across datasets. In addition, the trained Random Forest model showed a high prediction accuracy of 94.7% on an external (unseen) experimental dataset of peptides (Table S9), correctly classifying 54 out of 57 samples, demonstrating the model’s robustness and reliability for application to external datasets. AMPs showed higher importance for net charge, isoelectric point, and hydrophobic moment, while for CPPs, net charge, isoelectric point, and AI were the most critical factors. In ACs cluster, net charge, isoelectric point, and AI were the key variables. For non-HPs, the most important variables were identified as in vitro aggregation (Fig. 6, left panel). Remarkably, for cluster AC-nHPs containing peptides with antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and non-hemolytic properties, factors including AI, disordered confirmation propensity, in vitro aggregation, net charge, and isoelectric points were identified as critical features (Fig. 6, left panel; Fig. S2). These findings illustrate that identified factors displaying higher variable importance are critical in discriminating peptides based on their functionalities. Application of the Random Forest algorithm to assess the molecular descriptors and their associations with the functional properties of peptides. Panel A shows the variable importance of the molecular descriptors for the peptide groups AMPs, CPPs, nHPs, and cluster AC-nHPs. Panel B illustrates Pearson’s correlation coefficient matrix of cluster AC-nHPs, where the bar on the right indicates the proportion of positive (blue) and negative (red) correlations. The coefficient values range from 1 to −1, where 1 and − 1 indicate a perfect positive and negative linear relationship, respectively, whereas 0 indicates no linear relationship. The circle size represents the magnitude of the correlation, with larger circles indicating stronger correlations. (A–C) cell-penetration, hemolytic, and antimicrobial activity is predicted by MLCPP 2.0, HAPPENN, and AMP Scanner v2, respectively, while D to P is hydrophobic moment, GRAVY, disordered conformation propensity, AI, the propensity to PPII coil, linear moment, tilt angle, net charge, isoelectric point, angle subtended by the hydrophobic residues, peptide length, propensity to in vitro aggregation, and PD, respectively. Pearson’s correlation and variable importance data were analysed using the built-in Random Forest algorithm with the Corrplot package in R [37]. The heatmap for the symmetric correlation matrix was created using the software GraphPad Prism v10.3.3. Further, we performed the correlation analysis among the peptide’s functional properties and molecular descriptors for cluster AC-nHPs (Fig. 6, right panel) and ACs and peptide group AMPs, CPPs, and nHPs (Fig. S1). The cluster AC-nHPs showed significant positive and negative correlations among various physicochemical and structural parameters. For these peptides, antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and non-hemolytic properties exhibited a moderate positive correlation with GRAVY and DCP, while tilt angle showed a negative correlation. In the cluster AC-nHPs, peptide length showed a moderate to low positive correlation with non-hemolytic, antimicrobial, and cell-penetrating properties. Peptide length parameters, hydrophobic moment, DCP, and GRAVY all exhibited a high positive association with one another. Conversely, these factors negatively correlate with the AI, isoelectric point, tilt angle, propensity for PPII coil formation, and ASHR. These findings of the key functional and molecular variables and their correlations provide a valuable perspective on the interplay between molecular descriptors and biological activities. Further, helical wheel projection analysis was performed for cluster AC-nHPs (Fig. 7). Helical wheel projections visually represent the arrangement of amino acids in a helical region, showing the distribution of hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues along the helix. The visualization helps in identifying patterns like the orientation of hydrophobic amino acids towards the core of the α-helix peptide and polar amino acids towards the solvent-exposed surface. During membrane–AMP interactions, the high μH and ASHR of the peptide allow interaction of its hydrophobic phase with the cell membrane and membrane disruption [38]. Conversely, a helical peptide with a low hydrophobic phase, or μH value, enters cells without damaging the cell membrane. In contrast to HPs, most AC-nHPs do not adhere to the optimal peptide amphipathic structure, where either they lack or have a small hydrophobic phase that cannot break the cell membrane. Helical wheel projection of the AC-nHPs cluster. This projection highlights the distribution of charges and showcases hydrophilic, hydrophobic, positive and negative residues. Helical wheel projections were generated using the HeliQuest server [29]. An arrow at the helical wheel center depicts the hydrophobic moment’s direction. The majority of the peptides in the AC-nHPs cluster exhibit a non-hydrophobic phase, while a few display traces of a hydrophobic phase. Peptide antimicrobials have witnessed substantial growth due to their unique properties and therapeutic potential. Yet, their translation into clinics has been limited mainly due to their toxicity towards host cells and metabolic instability [1]. Designing therapeutic peptides involves continuously refining the peptide’s molecular properties in incremental steps. However, such trial-and-error approaches are constrained due to a limited understanding of the critical molecular factors and their relative significance in a peptide’s antimicrobial function and toxicity. The prior studies focused on predicting either cell-penetrating properties [17] or hemolytic properties of AMPs [18] but haven’t identified specific factors that identify AMPs with non-hemolytic and cell-penetrating properties. Our study overcomes these limitations by being the first to predict and assess different physicochemical and structural parameters for AMPs, CPPs, and HPs and their non-functional counterparts, nAMPs, nCPPs, and nHPs, both individually and comparatively. The functionality-based classification of peptides into six groups (AMPs, nAMPs, CPPs, nCPPs, HPs, nHPs) and three clusters (ACs, nACs, ACs-nHPs), and their predictive and statistical analyses for molecular descriptors, facilitated the identification of the key factors and their optimal range, and relative importance in influencing peptide’s functionality and action mechanisms. Our Random Forest model employed molecular physicochemical and structural properties of six groups and three clusters of peptides. We selected 12 molecular descriptors based on an extensive literature review for their importance in antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic properties. We minimized redundancy by excluding highly correlated descriptors while optimizing model efficiency and interpretability. The Random Forest model, trained on these descriptors, demonstrated strong performance, with a high accuracy of 94.7% for predicting bioactivity across an external experimental dataset (Table S9). The remarkable performance of our Random Forest model not only underscores its robustness and ability to predict unseen data with high accuracy. The majority of AMPs are known to be membrane-active with hemolytic properties [10], while most CPPs are non-hemolytic [13] and non-membranolytic [13]. The findings based on predictive analysis of critical physicochemical factors and their optimum values for each peptide group delineate properties of antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and/or hemolytic properties. Peptide’s hydrophobicity (GRAVY), DCP, isoelectric point, and in vitro aggregation emerged as four key differentiators between functional (AMPs/CPPs/HPs) and non-functional (nAMPs/nCPPs/nHPs) peptides. CPPs showed a direct correlation with net charge, isoelectric point, and an inverse correlation with hydrophobicity and DCP, aligning with previous reports [9, 41]. In contrast to CPPs, higher hydrophobic moment and ASHR values of AMPs and HPs suggest the importance of these factors in contributing to the antimicrobial and hemolytic activities of peptides. Notably, CPPs exhibit high amphiphilicity indices, high net charge, and low hydrophobic moment, which were identified as critical parameters, indicating that modulating these parameters can lead to AMPs with reduced toxicity and enhanced cell-penetration properties. The action of peptides on cell membranes depends mainly on peptide–peptide and peptide–membrane interactions, though the exact fate of these interactions still lacks a detailed understanding. Here, we focused on physicochemical properties influencing initial peptide–peptide and peptide–membrane interactions and the peptide structure and orientation on the membrane. Typically, the PD and tilt angle guide the orientation of the peptide relative to the cell membrane, impacting its disruptive potential [9]. Besides, the net charge and hydrophobicity ratio determines the number of absorbed peptides, affecting the peptide-to-lipid ratio on the membrane [11]. Based on our findings and existing literature, a proposed model explains why most AMPs and HPs are membrane-disruptive while CPPs are not (Fig. 8). This model highlights the interplay between net charge and GRAVY in peptide interactions with membranes and other peptide molecules. Proposed model to elucidate peptide modes of action and their dependence on molecular properties. Panel A illustrates a schematic model based on our findings of critical molecular factors and their optimal values for antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic activities. CPPs, AMPs, and HPs aggregate to varied degrees on the cell membrane, depending on their hydrophobicity, net charge peptide, and peptide-to-lipid ratios. HPs exhibit higher hydrophobicity, hydrophobic moment, and a moderate net charge, exhibit membranolytic activity, and follow the carpet model. AMPs with moderate hydrophobicity and net charge follow toroidal pore, barrel stave, and carpet model activity. CPPs with high net charge and low hydrophobicity will have higher peptide–peptide repulsion, preventing large aggregate formation and facilitating cell entry via the translocation mechanism. Panel B illustrates the in vitro and in vivo aggregation propensities of AMPs (green), CPPs (blue), and HPs (yellow). HPs and CPPs showed the highest and lowest in vivo aggregation propensities. HPs have the highest angle subtended by hydrophobic residues (ASHR) and a more extensive hydrophobic phase (panel C, not to scale). Peptide-membrane interactions depend on their structural configuration, influenced by factors like aggregation propensities, hydrophobic moment, ASHR, DCP, tilt angle, amphiphilicity, PPII coli propensity, and orientation on the membrane [9, 42]. Our results showed that CPPs displayed lower β-content compared to HPs, aligning with the Medina et al. report on CLIP6 peptide where lower β-sheet content promotes enhanced cell translocation and low hemolysis. The higher β-sheet peptides such as CLIPΔ caused significant hemolytic activities [40]. Notably, nAMPs and nCPPs often lack a net positive charge compared to AMPs and CPPs. In addition, the hydrophobic moment correlates with the peptide-membrane interactions and the hemolytic activity of peptides [38]. Our results suggest that AMPs and HPs, unlike CPPs, exhibit a higher hydrophobic moment and ASHR, promoting stronger hydrophobic interactions with the cell membrane, leading to membrane lysis. Interestingly, higher net charge and AI, and lower GRAVY and ASHR in most CPPs, ACs, and AC-nHPs suggest a disordered structure, potentially facilitating cellular entry without membrane disruption. We propose that CPPs form minimal aggregates on the membrane, enabling their translocation (Fig. 7). Furthermore, their higher cationic charges enhance membrane affinity while hindering peptide–peptide interactions through electrostatic repulsion [7, 42]. Consequently, sparse adsorption of CPPs onto the membrane prevents the formation of barrel staves or toroidal pores. Besides, high values of hydrophobic moments are required to disrupt the membrane by the carpet mechanism. Moreover, the high net charge and low hydrophobicity of CPPs reduce the DCP value, increasing structural flexibility and reducing in vivo aggregation [41, 42], facilitating non-disruptive cellular entry. These observations align with previous reports of more pronounced repulsion among CPPs than AMPs and HPs [7, 42]. Nevertheless, HPs often exhibit higher hydrophobicity and a tendency to oligomerize and form larger aggregates [10]. This allows HPs to achieve higher peptide-to-lipid ratios and employ a carpet model of membrane disruption, where membrane-bound HP aggregates change membrane structures and organizations, leading to their membrane-lytic and hemolytic effects. Conversely, AMPs, with their relatively lower hydrophobic moment employ the barrel-stave or toroidal models of membrane disruptions compared to the carpet model by HPs [7, 38]. However, AMPs with higher hydrophobic moments and a propensity for aggregation on the membrane may also utilize the carpet model membrane disruption [38]. Our findings also suggest that in vivo aggregation propensity is a key determinant of a peptide’s membrane-disruptive behaviour. Our proposed model supports the previous experimental study of Yin et al. that demonstrated the influence of hydrophobicity and aggregation on antimicrobial and hemolytic properties [41]. For example, peptide 6 K-F17, with its high net charge and low hydrophobicity, resulted in minimal hemolysis (0.3%) and negligible aggregation. In contrast, the variant 6K-F17-4L, with increased hydrophobicity, showed self-aggregation (in vivo aggregation) at membranes, leading to higher hemolysis (45.5%). Thus, the model presented in our study has great utility for predicting the bioactivity of novel peptides by scoring their molecular descriptors, and for the de novo design of AMPs, CPPs, and nHPs, individually or in combination. In conclusion, this study successfully employed bioinformatics and Random Forest methods to identify key physicochemical factors and their optimal ranges for designing CPPs, AMPs, and non-hemolytic peptides (AC-nHPs), individually and in combination. The study highlights the delicate interplay among key descriptors, such as hydrophobicity, hydrophobic moment, net charge, the angle subtended by hydrophobic residues, and aggregation propensity. This interplay defines a peptide’s action as membrane-disruptive or non-membrane-disruptive. Besides, the correlation among various functional and molecular properties is valuable for bioinformatics modelling to predict the behaviour of peptides. Notably, this work establishes valuable reference points for developing therapeutically safe and effective AMPs with broad applications in pharmacology, clinical settings, and agriculture. Furthermore, the approach can be extended to refine CPPs and other clinically relevant peptides, ultimately leading to enhanced drug delivery and reduced hemolytic activity. Physicochemical and structural factors can distinguish functional and non-functional antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic peptides. Peptides can be classified as antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, or/and non-hemolytic based on their optimal values for isoelectric point, GRAVY, disordered conformation propensity, the angle subtended by hydrophobic residues, and penetration depth. For antimicrobial peptides with cell-penetrating and non-hemolytic features, amphiphilicity index, isoelectric point, net charge, disordered conformation, and in vitro aggregation propensities are the most critical variables. Peptide action mechanisms, whether membrane-disrupting or non-disrupting, depend on their net charge, GARVY, penetration depth, and aggregation propensities. Modulating critical parameters enhances cell penetration and reduces hemolytic activity, thereby improving the safety and efficacy of antimicrobial peptides. Physicochemical and structural factors can distinguish functional and non-functional antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, and hemolytic peptides. Peptides can be classified as antimicrobial, cell-penetrating, or/and non-hemolytic based on their optimal values for isoelectric point, GRAVY, disordered conformation propensity, the angle subtended by hydrophobic residues, and penetration depth. For antimicrobial peptides with cell-penetrating and non-hemolytic features, amphiphilicity index, isoelectric point, net charge, disordered conformation, and in vitro aggregation propensities are the most critical variables. Peptide action mechanisms, whether membrane-disrupting or non-disrupting, depend on their net charge, GARVY, penetration depth, and aggregation propensities. Modulating critical parameters enhances cell penetration and reduces hemolytic activity, thereby improving the safety and efficacy of antimicrobial peptides. None declared. The author(s) declare that no financial support was received for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. S.C. conceptualized, coordinated, and framed the work. S.C. and M.K. supervised the execution of the work. A.K. mined peptide data, predicted functional and molecular descriptors, and proposed a model for peptide action. M.S. employed the Random Forest algorithm and calculated the variable importance and correlation coefficients. A.K. prepared figures, tables, and supplementary data. A.K. and S.C. performed the data analysis and refined the data visualization. S.C. and A.K. authored the manuscript. M.K. provided guidance for manuscript improvement and critically reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final version. The data underlying this article are available in the article and in its online supplementary material. No animal and human studies are presented in this manuscript.