【文献归属领域】: AMP 预测模型(兜底)
【文献标题】: Once-for-All: Train One Network and Specialize it for Efficient\n Deployment
【发表年份】: 2019
【引用次数】: 679
【PDF 直链】: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1908.09791

【摘要】: We address the challenging problem of efficient inference across many devices\nand resource constraints, especially on edge devices. Conventional approaches\neither manually design or use neural architecture search (NAS) to find a\nspecialized neural network and train it from scratch for each case, which is\ncomputationally prohibitive (causing $CO_2$ emission as much as 5 cars'\nlifetime) thus unscalable. In this work, we propose to train a once-for-all\n(OFA) network that supports diverse architectural settings by decoupling\ntraining and search, to reduce the cost. We can quickly get a specialized\nsub-network by selecting from the OFA network without additional training. To\nefficiently train OFA networks, we also propose a novel progressive shrinking\nalgorithm, a generalized pruning method that reduces the model size across many\nmore dimensions than pruning (depth, width, kernel size, and resolution). It\ncan obtain a surprisingly large number of sub-networks ($&gt; 10^{19}$) that can\nfit different hardware platforms and latency constraints while maintaining the\nsame level of accuracy as training independently. On diverse edge devices, OFA\nconsistently outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) NAS methods (up to 4.0%\nImageNet top1 accuracy improvement over MobileNetV3, or same accuracy but 1.5x\nfaster than MobileNetV3, 2.6x faster than EfficientNet w.r.t measured latency)\nwhile reducing many orders of magnitude GPU hours and $CO_2$ emission. In\nparticular, OFA achieves a new SOTA 80.0% ImageNet top-1 accuracy under the\nmobile setting ($&lt;$600M MACs). OFA is the winning solution for the 3rd Low\nPower Computer Vision Challenge (LPCVC), DSP classification track and the 4th\nLPCVC, both classification track and detection track. Code and 50 pre-trained\nmodels (for many devices &amp; many latency constraints) are released at\nhttps://github.com/mit-han-lab/once-for-all.\n

=========================================
【OpenAlex PDF 全文/核心正文提取】:
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020 ONCE-FOR-ALL: T RAIN ONENETWORK AND SPE- CIALIZE IT FOR EFFICIENT DEPLOYMENT Han Cai1, Chuang Gan2, Tianzhe Wang1, Zhekai Zhang1, Song Han1 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology,2MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab fhancai, chuangg, songhan g@mit.edu ABSTRACT We address the challenging problem of efﬁcient inference across many devices and resource constraints, especially on edge devices. Conventional approaches either manually design or use neural architecture search (NAS) to ﬁnd a specialized neural network and train it from scratch for each case, which is computationally prohibitive (causing CO 2emission as much as 5 cars’ lifetime Strubell et al. (2019)) thus unscalable. In this work, we propose to train a once-for-all (OFA) network that supports diverse architectural settings by decoupling training and search, to reduce the cost. We can quickly get a specialized sub-network by selecting from the OFA network without additional training. To efﬁciently train OFA networks, we also propose a novel progressive shrinking algorithm, a generalized pruning method that reduces the model size across many more dimensions than pruning (depth, width, kernel size, and resolution). It can obtain a surprisingly large number of sub- networks ( >1019) that can ﬁt different hardware platforms and latency constraints while maintaining the same level of accuracy as training independently. On diverse edge devices, OFA consistently outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA) NAS methods (up to 4.0% ImageNet top1 accuracy improvement over MobileNetV3, or same accuracy but 1.5faster than MobileNetV3, 2.6 faster than EfﬁcientNet w.r.t measured latency) while reducing many orders of magnitude GPU hours and CO 2 emission. In particular, OFA achieves a new SOTA 80.0% ImageNet top-1 accuracy under the mobile setting ( <600M MACs). OFA is the winning solution for the 3rd Low Power Computer Vision Challenge (LPCVC), DSP classiﬁcation track and the 4th LPCVC, both classiﬁcation track and detection track. Code and 50 pre-trained models (for many devices & many latency constraints) are released at https://github.com/mit-han-lab/once-for-all . 1 I NTRODUCTION Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) deliver state-of-the-art accuracy in many machine learning applica- tions. However, the explosive growth in model size and computation cost gives rise to new challenges on how to efﬁciently deploy these deep learning models on diverse hardware platforms, since they have to meet different hardware efﬁciency constraints (e.g., latency, energy). For instance, one mobile application on App Store has to support a diverse range of hardware devices, from a high-end Sam- sung Note10 with a dedicated neural network accelerator to a 5-year-old Samsung S6 with a much slower processor. With different hardware resources (e.g., on-chip memory size, #arithmetic units), the optimal neural network architecture varies signiﬁcantly. Even running on the same hardware, under different battery conditions or workloads, the best model architecture also differs a lot. Given different hardware platforms and efﬁciency constraints (deﬁned as deployment scenarios), researchers either design compact models specialized for mobile (Howard et al., 2017; Sandler et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018) or accelerate the existing models by compression (Han et al., 2016; He et al., 2018) for efﬁcient deployment. However, designing specialized DNNs for every scenario is engineer-expensive and computationally expensive, either with human-based methods or NAS. Since such methods need to repeat the network design process and retrain the designed network from scratch for each case. Their total cost grows linearly as the number of deployment scenarios increases, which will result in excessive energy consumption and CO 2emission (Strubell et al., 2019). It makes them unable to handle the vast amount of hardware devices (23.14 billion IoT devices till 1arXiv:1908.09791v5 [cs.LG] 29 Apr 2020 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020 Number of Deployment Scenarios 0 20 40 60 80 16x~1300x reductiondirect deploy (no retrain)train a once-for-all network specialized sub-nets Samsung Note10 Latency (ms) cpu FPGA Diﬀerent Hardware / Constraint Design CostPrevious: O(N) design costOurs: O(1) design cost Mobile AITiny AI(AIoT)Cloud AI Top-1 ImageNet Acc (%)676971737577 691215182124 OFAMobileNetV3 70.076.1Train Once, Get Many75.273.370.467.4Train Four Times, Get Four MCU Number of Deployment Scenarios 0 20 40 60 80 16x~1300x reductiondirect deploy (no retrain)train a once-for-all network specialized sub-nets cpu FPGA Diﬀerent Hardware / Constraint Design CostPrevious: O(N) design costOurs: O(1) design cost Mobile AITiny AI(AIoT)Cloud AI MCU 1 Figure 1: Left: a single once-for-all network is trained to support versatile architectural conﬁgurations including depth, width, kernel size, and resolution. Given a deployment scenario, a specialized sub- network is directly selected from the once-for-all network without training. Middle: this approach reduces the cost of specialized deep learning deployment from O(N) to O(1). Right: once-for-all network followed by model selection can derive many accuracy-latency trade-offs by training only once, compared to conventional methods that require repeated training. 20181) and highly dynamic deployment environments (different battery conditions, different latency requirements, etc.). This paper introduces a new solution to tackle this challenge – designing a once-for-all network that can be directly deployed under diverse architectural conﬁgurations, amortizing the training cost. The inference is performed by selecting only part of the once-for-all network. It ﬂexibly supports different depths, widths, kernel sizes, and resolutions without retraining. A simple example of Once-for-All (OFA) is illustrated in Figure 1 (left). Speciﬁcally, we decouple the model training stage and the neural architecture search stage. In the model training stage, we focus on improving the accuracy of all sub-networks that are derived by selecting different parts of the once-for-all network. In the model specialization stage, we sample a subset of sub-networks to train an accuracy predictor and latency predictors. Given the target hardware and constraint, a predictor-guided architecture search (Liu et al., 2018) is conducted to get a specialized sub-network, and the cost is negligible. As such, we reduce the total cost of specialized neural network design from O(N) to O(1) (Figure 1 middle). However, training the once-for-all network is a non-trivial task, since it requires joint optimization of the weights to maintain the accuracy of a large number of sub-networks (more than 1019in our experiments). It is computationally prohibitive to enumerate all sub-networks to get the exact gradient in each update step, while randomly sampling a few sub-networks in each step will lead to signiﬁcant accuracy drops. The challenge is that different sub-networks are interfering with each other, making the training process of the whole once-for-all network inefﬁcient. To address this challenge, we propose a progressive shrinking algorithm for training the once-for-all network. Instead of directly optimizing the once-for-all network from scratch, we propose to ﬁrst train the largest neural network with maximum depth, width, and kernel size, then progressively ﬁne-tune the once-for-all network to support smaller sub-networks that share weights with the larger ones. As such, it provides better initialization by selecting the most important weights of larger sub-networks, and the opportunity to distill smaller sub-networks, which greatly improves the training efﬁciency. From this perspective, progressive shrinking can be viewed as a generalized network pruning method that shrinks multiple dimensions (depth, width, kernel size, and resolution) of the full network rather than only the width dimension. Besides, it targets on maintaining the accuracy of all sub-networks rather than a single pruned network. We extensively evaluated the effectiveness of OFA on ImageNet with many hardware platforms (CPU, GPU, mCPU, mGPU, FPGA accelerator) and efﬁciency constraints. Under all deployment scenarios, OFA consistently improves the ImageNet accuracy by a signiﬁcant margin compared to SOTA hardware-aware NAS methods while saving the GPU hours, dollars, and CO 2emission by orders of magnitude. On the ImageNet mobile setting (less than 600M MACs), OFA achieves a new SOTA 80.0% top1 accuracy with 595M MACs (Figure 2). To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time that the SOTA ImageNet top1 accuracy reaches 80% under the mobile setting. 1https://www.statista.com/statistics/471264/iot-number-of-connected-devices-worldwide/ 2 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020 0123456789MACs (Billion)69717375777981ImageNet Top-1 accuracy (%)2M4M8MHandcrafted16MAutoML32M64M/uni2192/uni2192The higher the betterThe lower the betterOnce-for-All (ours)EﬃcientNetProxylessNASMBNetV3AmoebaNetMBNetV2PNASNetShuﬄeNetDARTSIGCV3-DMobileNetV1 (MBNetV1)NASNet-A InceptionV2DenseNet-121DenseNet-169ResNet-50ResNetXt-50InceptionV3DenseNet-264DPN-92ResNet-101XceptionResNetXt-10114x reduction595M MACs 80.0% Top-1 Model Size 1 Figure 2: Comparison between OFA and state-of-the-art CNN models on ImageNet. OFA provides 80.0% ImageNet top1 accuracy under the mobile setting ( <600M MACs). 2 R ELATED WORK Efﬁcient Deep Learning. Many efﬁcient neural network architectures are proposed to improve the hardware efﬁciency, such as SqueezeNet (Iandola et al., 2016), MobileNets (Howard et al., 2017; Sandler et al., 2018), ShufﬂeNets (Ma et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018), etc. Orthogonal to architecting efﬁcient neural networks, model compression (Han et al., 2016) is another very effective technique for efﬁcient deep learning, including network pruning that removes redundant units (Han et al., 2015) or redundant channels (He et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2017), and quantization that reduces the bit width for the weights and activations (Han et al., 2016; Courbariaux et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2017). Neural Architecture Search. Neural architecture search (NAS) focuses on automating the architec- ture design process (Zoph & Le, 2017; Zoph et al., 2018; Real et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2018a; Liu et al., 2019). Early NAS methods (Zoph et al., 2018; Real et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2018b) search for high- accuracy architectures without taking hardware efﬁciency into consideration. Therefore, the produced architectures (e.g., NASNet, AmoebaNet) are not efﬁcient for inference. Recent hardware-aware NAS methods (Cai et al., 2019; Tan et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019) directly incorporate the hardware feedback into architecture search. Hardware-DNN co-design techniques (Jiang et al., 2019b;a; Hao et al., 2019) jointly optimize neural network architectures and hardware architectures. As a result, they can improve inference efﬁciency. However, given new inference hardware platforms, these methods need to repeat the architecture search process and retrain the model, leading to prohibitive GPU hours, dollars, and CO 2emission. They are not scalable to a large number of deployment scenarios. The individually trained models do not share any weight, leading to large total model size and high downloading bandwidth. Dynamic Neural Networks. To improve the efﬁciency of a given neural network, some work explored skipping part of the model based on the input image. For example, Wu et al. (2018); Liu & Deng (2018); Wang et al. (2018) learn a controller or gating modules to adaptively drop layers; Huang et al. (2018) introduce early-exit branches in the computation graph; Lin et al. (2017) adaptively prune channels based on the input feature map; Kuen et al. (2018) introduce stochastic downsampling point to reduce the feature map size adaptively. Recently, Slimmable Nets (Yu et al., 2019; Yu & Huang, 2019b) propose to train a model to support multiple width multipliers (e.g., 4 different global width multipliers), building upon existing human-designed neural networks (e.g., MobileNetV2 0.35, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0). Such methods can adaptively ﬁt different efﬁciency constraints at runtime, however, still inherit a pre-designed neural network (e.g., MobileNet-v2), which limits the degree of ﬂexibility (e.g., only width multiplier can adapt) and the ability in handling new deployment scenarios where the pre-designed neural network is not optimal. In this work, in contrast, we enable a much more diverse architecture space (depth, width, kernel size, and resolution) and a signiﬁcantly larger number of architectural settings ( 1019v.s. 4 (Yu et al., 2019)). Thanks to the diversity and the large design 3 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020 39 train with full widthchannel importance0.02 0.15 0.85 0.63channel sortingprogressively shrink the width channel importance0.82 0.11 0.46 reorg.reorg.progressively shrink the widthchannel sortingO1O2O3O1O2O1Gradually shrink the width Keep the most important channels when shrinking via channel sorting FullFullFullFullPartialPartialPartial Elastic ResolutionElastic Kernel SizePartial Elastic Width Elastic DepthProgressive Shrinking Figure 3: Illustration of the progressive shrinking process to support different depth D, width W, kernel size Kand resolution R. It leads to a large space comprising diverse sub-networks ( >1019). space, we can derive new specialized neural networks for many different deployment scenarios rather than working on top of an existing neural network that limits the optimization headroom. However, it is more challenging to train the network to achieve this ﬂexibility, which motivates us to design the progressive shrinking algorithm to tackle this challenge. 3 M ETHOD 3.1 P ROBLEM FORMALIZATION Assuming the weights of the once-for-all network as Woand the architectural conﬁgurations as farch ig, we then can formalize the problem as min WoX arch iLval  C(Wo; arch i) ; (1) where C(Wo; arch i)denotes a selection scheme that selects part of the model from the once-for-all network Woto form a sub-network with architectural conﬁguration arch i. The overall training objective is to optimize Woto make each supported sub-network maintain the same level of accuracy asindependently training a network with the same architectural conﬁguration. 3.2 A RCHITECTURE SPACE Our once-for-all network provides one model but supports many sub-networks of different sizes, covering four important dimensions of the convolutional neural networks (CNNs) architectures, i.e., depth, width, kernel size, and resolution. Following the common practice of many CNN models (He et al., 2016; Sandler et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2017), we divide a CNN model into a sequence of units with gradually reduced feature map size and increased channel numbers. Each unit consists of a sequence of layers where only the ﬁrst layer has stride 2 if the feature map size decreases (Sandler et al., 2018). All the other layers in the units have stride 1. We allow each unit to use arbitrary numbers of layers (denoted as elastic depth ); For each layer, we allow to use arbitrary numbers of channels (denoted as elastic width ) and arbitrary kernel sizes (denoted as elastic kernel size ). In addition, we also allow the CNN model to take arbitrary input image sizes (denoted as elastic resolution ). For example, in our experiments, the input image size ranges from 128 to 224 with a stride 4; the depth of each unit is chosen from f2, 3, 4g; the width expansion ratio in each layer is chosen from f3, 4, 6g; the kernel size is chosen from f3, 5, 7g. Therefore, with 5 units, we have roughly ((33)2+ (33)3+ (33)4)521019different neural network architectures and each of them can be used under 25 different input resolutions. Since all of these sub-networks share the same weights (i.e., Wo) (Cheung et al., 2019), we only require 7.7M parameters to store all of them. Without sharing, the total model size will be prohibitive. 3.3 T RAINING THE ONCE-FOR-ALL NETWORK Na¨ıve Approach. Training the once-for-all network can be cast as a multi-objective problem, where each objective corresponds to one sub-network. From this perspective, a na ¨ıve training approach is to directly optimize the once-for-all network from scratch using the exact gradient of the overall objective, which is derived by enumerating all sub-networks in each update step, as shown in Eq. (1). The cost of this approach is linear to the number of sub-networks. Therefore, it is only applicable to scenarios where a limited number of sub-networks are supported (Yu et al., 2019), while in our case, it is computationally prohibitive to adopt this approach. Another na ¨ıve training approach is to sample a few sub-networks in each update step rather than enumerate all of them, which does not have the issue of prohibitive cost. However, with such a large number of sub-networks that share weights, thus interfere with each other, we ﬁnd it suffers from 4 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020 Connection to Network Pruning 15Train the full modelShrink the model (only width) Fine-tune the small net single pruned networkNetwork Pruning Train the full modelShrink the model (4 dimensions)Fine-tune both large and small sub-nets once-for-all network•Progressive shrinking can be viewed as a generalized network pruning with much higher flexibility across 4 dimensions. Progressive Shrinking Figure 4: Progressive shrinking can be viewed as a generalized network pruning technique with much higher ﬂexibility. Compared to network pruning, it shrinks more dimensions (not only width) and provides a much more powerful once-for-all network that can ﬁt different deployment scenarios rather than a single pruned network. 7x7 Transform Matrix 25x255x5Transform Matrix 9x93x3 train with full widthchannel importance0.020.150.850.63channel sortingprogressively shrink the widthunit i train with full depthchannel importance0.820.110.46 reorg.channel sortingreorg. progressively shrink the widthchannel sorting.+++p1p2p3O1O2O3O1O2O1unit ishrink the depthO1O2unit ishrink the depthO1O2O3  1 Figure 5: Left: Kernel transformation matrix for elastic kernel size. Right: Progressive shrinking for elastic depth. Instead of skipping each layer independently, we keep the ﬁrst Dlayers and skip the last(4 D)layers. The weights of the early layers are shared. signiﬁcant accuracy drop. In the following section, we introduce a solution to address this challenge, i.e.,progressive shrinking . Progressive Shrinking. The once-for-all network comprises many sub-networks of different sizes where small sub-networks are nested in large sub-networks. To prevent interference between the sub-networks, we propose to enforce a training order from large sub-networks to small sub-networks in a progressive manner. We name this training scheme as progressive shrinking (PS). An example of the training process with PS is provided in Figure 3 and Figure 4, where we start with training the largest neural network with the maximum kernel size (e.g., 7), depth (e.g., 4), and width (e.g., 6). Next, we progressively ﬁne-tune the network to support smaller sub-networks by gradually adding them into the sampling space (larger sub-networks may also be sampled). Speciﬁcally, after training the largest network, we ﬁrst support elastic kernel size which can choose from f3, 5, 7gat each layer, while the depth and width remain the maximum values. Then, we support elastic depth and elastic width sequentially, as is shown in Figure 3. The resolution is elastic throughout the whole training process, which is implemented by sampling different image sizes for each batch of training data. We also use the knowledge distillation technique after training the largest neural network (Hinton et al., 2015; Ashok et al., 2018; Yu & Huang, 2019b). It combines two loss terms using both the soft labels given by the largest neural network and the real labels. Compared to the na ¨ıve approach, PS prevents small sub-networks from interfering large sub-networks, since large sub-networks are already well-trained when the once-for-all network is ﬁne-tuned to support small sub-networks. Regarding the small sub-networks, they share the weights with the large ones. Therefore, PS allows initializing small sub-networks with the most important weights of well-trained large sub-networks, which expedites the training process. Compared to network pruning (Figure 4), PS also starts with training the full model, but it shrinks not only the width dimension but also the depth, kernel size, and resolution dimensions of the full model. Additionally, PS ﬁne-tunes both large and small sub-networks rather than a single pruned network. As a result, PS provides a much more powerful once-for-all network that can ﬁt diverse hardware platforms and efﬁciency constraints compared to network pruning. We describe the details of the PS training ﬂow as follows: 5 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020 7x7 Transformation Matrix: 25x255x5Transformation Matrix: 9x93x3 train with full widthchannel importance0.020.150.850.63channel sortingprogressively shrink the widthstage istage i train with full depthstage ichannel importance0.820.110.46 reorg.channel sortingreorg.progressively shrink the widthchannel sorting progressively shrink the depthprogressively shrink the depth. O1+++p1p2p3 O2O3O1O2O1O2O3O1O2O1  1 Figure 6: Progressive shrinking for elastic width. In this example, we progressively support 4, 3, and 2 channel settings. We perform channel sorting and pick the most important channels (with large L1 norm) to initialize the smaller channel settings. The important channels’ weights are shared. Elastic Kernel Size (Figure 5 left). We let the center of a 7x7 convolution kernel also serve as a 5x5 kernel, the center of which can also be a 3x3 kernel. Therefore, the kernel size becomes elastic. The challenge is that the centering sub-kernels (e.g., 3x3 and 5x5) are shared and need to play multiple roles (independent kernel and part of a large kernel). The weights of centered sub-kernels may need to have different distribution or magnitude as different roles. Forcing them to be the same degrades the performance of some sub-networks. Therefore, we introduce kernel transformation matrices when sharing the kernel weights. We use separate kernel transformation matrices for different layers. Within each layer, the kernel transformation matrices are shared among different channels. As such, we only need 2525 + 99 = 706 extra parameters to store the kernel transformation matrices in each layer, which is negligible. Elastic Depth (Figure 5 right). To derive a sub-network that has Dlayers in a unit that originally hasNlayers, we keep the ﬁrstD layers and skip the last N Dlayers, rather than keeping any Dlayers as done in current NAS methods (Cai et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2019). As such, one depth setting only corresponds to one combination of layers. In the end, the weights of the ﬁrst D layers are shared between large and small models. Elastic Width (Figure 6). Width means the number of channels. We give each layer the ﬂexibility to choose different channel expansion ratios. Following the progressive shrinking scheme, we ﬁrst train a full-width model. Then we introduce a channel sorting operation to support partial widths. It reorganizes the channels according to their importance, which is calculated based on the L1 norm of a channel’s weight. Larger L1 norm means more important. For example, when shrinking from a 4-channel-layer to a 3-channel-layer, we select the largest 3 channels, whose weights are shared with the 4-channel-layer (Figure 6 left and middle). Thereby, smaller sub-networks are initialized with the most important channels on the once-for-all network which is already well trained. This channel sorting operation preserves the accuracy of larger sub-networks. 3.4 S PECIALIZED MODEL DEPLOYMENT WITH ONCE-FOR-ALL NETWORK Having trained a once-for-all network, the next stage is to derive the specialized sub-network for a given deployment scenario. The goal is to search for a neural network that satisﬁes the efﬁciency (e.g., latency, energy) constraints on the target hardware while optimizing the accuracy. Since OFA decouples model training from neural architecture search, we do not need any training cost in this stage. Furthermore, we build neural-network-twins to predict the latency and accuracy given a neural network architecture, providing a quick feedback for model quality. It eliminates the repeated search cost by substituting the measured accuracy/latency with predicted accuracy/latency (twins). Speciﬁcally, we randomly sample 16K sub-networks with different architectures and input image sizes, then measure their accuracy on 10K validation images sampled from the original training set. These [architecture, accuracy] pairs are used to train an accuracy predictor to pr
=========================================
