【文献归属领域】: AMP 预测模型(SerpApi)
【文献标题】: Latent spaces for antimicrobial peptide design
【出版信息】: S Renaud, RA Mansbach - Digital Discovery, 2023 - pubs.rsc.org
【引用次数】: 25
【PDF 直链】: https://pubs.rsc.org/de-at/content/articlepdf/2023/dd/d2dd00091a

【摘要】: … de novo generation of antimicrobial peptide sequences and … , a feature not present, out of the box, in GAN architectures. … space, we investigate the identification of “bridge variables” for …

=========================================
【SerpApi PDF 全文/核心正文提取】:
Latent spaces for antimicrobial peptide design † Samuel Renaud and Rachael A. Mansbach * Current antibacterial treatments cannot overcome the rapidly growing resistance of bacteria to antibiotic drugs, and novel treatment methods are required. One option is the development of new antimicrobialpeptides (AMPs), to which bacterial resistance build-up is comparatively slow. Deep generative modelshave recently emerged as a powerful method for generating novel therapeutic candidates from existingdatasets; however, there has been less research focused on evaluating the search spaces associated withthese generators from which they sample their new data-points. In this research we employ ﬁve deep learning model architectures for de novo generation of antimicrobial peptide sequences and assess the properties of their associated latent spaces. We train a RNN, RNN with attention, WAE, AAE and Transformer model and compare their abilities to construct desirable latent spaces in 32, 64, and 128dimensions. We assess reconstruction accuracy, generative capability, and model interpretability anddemonstrate that while most models are able to create a partitioning in their latent spaces into regionsof low and high AMP sampling probability, they do so in di ﬀerent manners and by appealing to di ﬀerent underlying physicochemical properties. In this way we demonstrate several benchmarks that must beconsidered for such models and suggest that for optimization of search space properties, an ensemblemethodology is most appropriate for design of new AMPs. We design an AMP discovery pipeline and present candidate sequences and properties from three models that achieved high benchmark scores. Overall, by tuning models and their accompanying latent spaces properly, targeted sampling of newanti-microbial peptides with ideal characteristics is achievable. 1 Introduction Growing antibiotic resistance is a major threat to global health, turning infections that were once easy to treat into life-threatening illnesses. 1,2Such rapidly increasing resistance to traditional antibiotic regimens has led to the necessity ofnding new and unique treatment methods. 3One possible recourse is the use of antimicrobial peptides (AMPs),4,5which have been identi ed within the innate immune systems of a multitude of species, including humans, and which act to modulate the proliferation of infectious diseases.6AMPs comprise a candidate class of short proteins, generally nolonger than 100 amino acids and o en much shorter. 7Many of them preferentially partition onto prokaryotic (bacterial) overeukaryotic (mammalian) cell membranes and cause bacterialcell death through destabilization of the membrane andexpulsion of the intracellular contents. 8,9Because of the indis- criminate manner with which they attack an integral part of the cell, build-up of resistance to AMPs is relatively slow. Databases of around 10 000 discovered AMP sequences,10–13have beenmade publicly available, but there remains signi cant need for further cataloging and disparate analyses. One tool of growing importance in the arsenal of the biomolecular designer is generative deep learning, a subset ofdeep learning. 14Deep learning, in which a computer optimizes the parameterization of a neural network model in a data-rich regime, has become a powerful player in recent years by leveraging the increasing amounts of scienti c data and the phenomenal growth in computational power over the lastdecades. Neural networks are formed by connecting simplefunctional units known as “perceptrons ”through their inputs and outputs to form complex function approximators. Non-linear activation functions between the linear operationsincrease model representational capacity at the cost of having to solve a non-convex optimisation task. 15Generative deep learning in speci c refers to the use of a model trained from a large body of data to sample new datapoints from an under-lying probability distribution intended to mimic as closely aspossible that of the training data. One particular variety ofgenerative deep learning model demonstrating competitiveperformance in the sphere of biomolecular design is the varia-tional auto-encoder (VAE) and its variants, 16,17in which data points are explicitly embedded in a smooth, continuous “latent space ”that can function as a search space for optimization.18 In the past ve years, there has been an explosion of research in the eld of deep generative models for small molecule drugPhysics Department, Concordia University, 7141 Sherbrooke Street West, Montreal, Quebec H4B1R6, Canada. E-mail: re.mansbach@concordia.ca †Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: With supplementary gures and tables. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2dd00091aCite this: Digital Discovery ,2 0 2 3 , 2, 441 Received 30th August 2022 Accepted 9th February 2023 DOI: 10.1039/d2dd00091arsc.li/digitaldiscovery © 2023 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry Digital Discovery ,2 0 2 3 , 2,4 4 1 –458 | 441Digital Discovery PAPER Open Access Article. Published on 16 Februar 2023. Downloaded on 18.04.2026 04:01:00. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence. View Article Online View Journal | View Issue design.18–22Most work in this area has, until now, has been focused on the design of small molecules, with only a few studies on the design of short peptides,23–25but in the last year or two research in this area has begun to grow.23For example, Das et al.23 constructed a Wasserstein Autoencoder (WAE) model that formed a complete pipeline for de novo protein design and identi ed two sequences with potent antimicrobial activity against E. coli . In another paper by the same team,24they created a tool, (IVELS), for analysing VAE models, throughout the training process, with which they could select models that perform best. Two other relevant recent studies have reported onthe use of an Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model to designpeptides with experimentally-veri ed activity against multi-drug resistant pathogens, and the use of generative Recurrent NeuralNetworks (RNNs) to design non-hemolytic AMPs. 26,27 One primary point of interest that is beginning to attract attention is the quality of the latent space itself. Because in data- rich regimes, VAEs and other generative models can be extremely powerful, the focus in past work has been primarilyon improving performance. 19,28 –32However, construction of an interpretable and well-organized latent space not only tends tomake targeted feature sample generation easier, it also signi - cantly improves the ability of the user to apply domain expertiseto the problem at hand. Therefore, although we do not ignoremodel performance, a major focus of this article is on inter- pretability, trustworthiness, and organization of the latent spaces themselves. In work by G ´omez-Bombarelli et al. , 18,31,33the authors demonstrated that training a property predictor on the latentspace and forcing the model to consider the quality of itspredictions as part of its overall goal leads to an ordering of thelatent space, which is desirable for generating candidates withparticular features. Because latent spaces tend towards dimen- sionalities on the order of 30 or above, this orderedness has been visually presented through projection onto a two-dimensional space, o en by using principal components anal- ysis (PCA) to identify the most relevant variables. Since PCA isa linear projection, it remains unclear how well this visualorderedness is preserved in the high-dimensional space, andtherefore we make a point to address the trustworthiness of thissimple, rapid, and useful analytic technique. While previous methods have focused on the longer proteins that represent a larger fraction of the known proteome thisresearch focuses on small antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). Muchof the previous work discovering protein embeddings with deepneural networks has used large latent space representations 34–36 to maximize data throughput or graph-based representations which require the use of graph neural networks to process theprotein graphs. In this work we emphasize small latent repre- sentations and model interpretability in order to construct interpretable search spaces for AMP design. More generally, in this article, we focus on the question of latent space quality and interpretability for the relevant test caseof generation of novel antimicrobial peptide sequences. We trainve diﬀerent deep generative models with VAE-like latent spaces and assess and compare their di ﬀerent behaviors in terms of reconstruction accuracy, generative capacity, and interpretability.We demonstrate that, as expected, a property predictor leads to an ordering in the latent space. We quantify this ordering and assess how well a PCA projection captures the properties of theoriginal latent space. We argue that the better the PCA projection,the more interpretable the latent space, because we can applya ranking to linear combinations of the latent space dimensions,allowing us to more easily identify bridge variables that tell uswhat the model considers important. We also show that themodels are capable of generating unique and diverse sequences that grow more AMP-like in speci c regions of the latent space. 2 Methods We trained ve diﬀerent models of three di ﬀerent latent-space sizes on a dataset of approximately 300 000 short peptides. In the following sections, we describe and justify the dataset and its properties, the model architectures and the training proce-dure with relevant hyperparameters. 2.1 AMP dataset construction The datasets used in this study are a subset of peptides from the Uniprot database, 37composed of 268 195 short peptide sequences with a maximum sequence length of 50 residues,combined with a set of 35 806 sequences from the StarPepdatabase, which features short bio-active peptides. 38We restrict our training set to sequences of lengths 2 –50 amino acids because a signi cant majority of AMPs are short peptides with length <50, and 85% of the peptides featured in StarPep are between 2 and 50 amino acids long.39Preliminary testing demonstrated that retaining peptides up to 100 amino acids inlength led to worse performance, presumably due to theheightened sparsi cation of the dataset in that regime. Out of the total 45 120 peptides in the StarPep database, 13 437 of them are labelled as having antimicrobial properties(Fig. S2 †). StarPep aggregates bioactive peptides from over 40 existing datasets featuring peptides with sequence lengths between 2 and 100 amino acids. A er removing from the dataset the 15% of the peptides featured in StarPep withsequence lengths greater than 50 amino acids and peptides withnon-standard amino acids, we retained 35 806 of the original 45120 sequences, of which 10 841 are labelled as having antimi-crobial properties. The remaining 24 965 peptides from Starpepdid not have the label antimicrobial. Although certain deep learning algorithms can perform well when trained on “smaller ”datasets of tens of thousands of datapoints, 26,27these are more typically classi ers rather than generators. When we trained our models on the 35 806 data-points from the StarPep database alone, we found that themodels demonstrated poor reconstruction accuracy, lowrobustness, and high error. One method for solving this is topretrain on a large corpus and ne-tune on a smaller one; however, we chose instead to train all at once on a larger corpus, as has previously been done for natural language models and chemical language models. 18–22 Since preliminary analysis on the StarPep database sequences indicated that 35 806 was not a large enough dataset 442 |Digital Discovery ,2 0 2 3 , 2, 441 –458 © 2023 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of ChemistryDigital Discovery Paper Open Access Article. Published on 16 Februar 2023. Downloaded on 18.04.2026 04:01:00. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence. View Article Online to properly train our generative VAE-based models, we expanded the dataset by adding negative examples from Uni- prot. A er executing the query [(length:[2 TO 50]) AND (keyword:(KW-0929))], we found 714 of unreviewed peptidesequences with the label “antimicrobial ”and, placing “NOT” before the keyword, found 3 713 736 of unreviewed peptidesequences without the label “antimicrobial ”. We also found 1108 of reviewed peptide sequences with the label “antimicro- bial”and 11 941 reviewed peptides without the label “antimi- crobial ”. Since we would not have been able to signi cantly expand our dataset by using solely reviewed sequences, wechoose to include some non-reviewed sequences. We recognizethat in the worse case it is possible that this may includea potentially substantial number of AMPs that have not beenidenti ed as such. We considered the possibility of utilizing an existing sequence predictor for AMPs to identify these possiblyunlabeled AMPs; however, we decided against it to avoid introducing unknown assumptions into the data at this stage. Instead we consider a di ﬀerent goal for ordering the space. We employ a property predictor that classi es as hits peptides with experimentally-veri ed antimicrobial properties (which we label with integer 1) and as misses peptides withoutexperimentally-veri ed antimicrobial properties (which we label with integer 0) and demonstrate that training sucha predictor enforces an ordering of the space that allows generation of AMP-like sequences. To avoid having a prohibitively small percentage of experimentally-veri ed AMPs in the dataset and to match the sizes of datasets used in previous experiments with similararchitectures, we subsampled 10% of the 3 million unrevieweddatapoints of Uniprot and selected 268 195 to form an addi-tional set of datapoints. Subsampling was done at random,subject to the constraint of retaining a roughly equal number of peptide sequences of each length to ameliorate the extent to which the models focused on this aspect, though there are fewervery short sequences due combinatoric constraints (Fig. S9 †). Together the 268 195 peptides from Uniprot and 35 806 from StarPep form our full dataset of 304 001 peptides, of which 10841 were labeled “veried AMPs ”(all from StarPep) and 293 160 were labeled “non-veri ed-AMPs ”(a mixture of Uniprot and Starpep sequences). We note here again that we only labeled those sequences as AMPs that are experimentally veri ed as such. Although this could introduce a bias into the propertypredictor from the unreviewed sequences, we believe that thischoice is justi ed because our goal is not to classify sequences but to order the space in a sensible manner. A er ensuring there was no sequence redundancy between the merged data-sets, we inspected various physicochemical properties of the“veried AMP ”and “non-veri ed-AMP ”labeled data sets to ensure they represented a broad distribution over peptide sequence space and had largely similar distributions of variousphysico-chemical properties (Fig. S10 –S19† ). 2.2 Deep learning models Deep generative models are powerful research tools for de novo drug design. Throughout the training process these models canconstruct smooth latent space embeddings. Once fully trained the learned latent spaces can be explored, and information-rich clusters can be identi ed. Such continuous latent spaces allow users to sample and decode novel molecules with desirablefeatures. We investigated ve diﬀerent deep learning architectures applied to the task of generating new peptide sequences froma learned distribution, all of which incorporate a variationalautoencoder (VAE) element, along with a VAE-like latent space. The variational autoencoder is a model introduced in Kingma and Welling 16that combines an “encoder ”and a“decoder ”to form a variational inference model. In speci c, given a dataset with a marginal likelihood pq(x), the objective of the VAE is to learn the parameter set { q} that most closely reproduces the data's distribution p(x).17,40,41VAEs operate under an evidence lower bound (ELBO) maximization objectivethat leads to a joint maximisation of the marginal likelihood p q(x) and a minimization of the Kullback –Leibler (KL) diver- gence of the decoder-approximated posterior qf(zjx) from the true posterior pq(zjx), where zrepresents the embedding vari- ables of the latent space and pq(z) is the latent space prior, which for the standard VAE is a Gaussian distribution. There are multiple types of generative models; the two most well-known and o en-used are VAEs and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). We choose to employ VAE-based models because VAEs boast a number of properties of particular rele- vance for our speci c case of developing smooth, interpretable latent spaces with potential use as search spaces for computer-aided biomolecular design. In comparison to GANs, VAEs havea more natural formulation of an associated latent space, witha rigorous mathematical derivation from Bayesian probabilitytheory. 17The assumption of a Gaussian prior enforces a certain level of smoothness and continuity that is desirable in a design space, and allows for the sampling of Gaussian distributions “near”any de ned point in the space. Finally, on a practical note, they have demonstrated utility in the eld of de novo small molecule design,18and we wanted to determine their utility for sequence-based AMP design as well. VAE's also feature anencoder which can directly map new samples of interest to theirrespective latent vectors, a feature not present, out of the box, inGAN architectures. The architectures in this research all feature a latent space comparable to that of a VAE, which in theory should constitutethe minimal explanation of the data. It is also desirable for thelatent space to be ordered in such a way that it is understand-able or interpretable for a subject-matter expert. This latentspace is used to interpret the model's latent mapping of inputsfrom the prior distribution. The latent space also allows forvisualisation of embeddings and feature clustering of proteins. In what follows, we introduce the VAE models and their unique di ﬀerences. Brie y the RNN, RNN-Attention and Trans- VAE models all employ the typical VAE bottleneck with mean ( m) and log of the variance ( s) network layers while the AAE and WAE employ unique loss functions which regularize the latentspace to match a set distribution. We started with three publicly available models modi ed from work by Dollar et al. , 28in which the authors compared a recurrent © 2023 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry Digital Discovery ,2 0 2 3 , 2, 441 –458 | 443Paper Digital Discovery Open Access Article. Published on 16 Februar 2023. Downloaded on 18.04.2026 04:01:00. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence. View Article Online neural network (RNN), a RNN with an attention layer and a Transformer to assess their respective capabilities for gener- ating SMILES strings describing novel molecular compounds fordrug design. The models all made use of a VAE architecture thatgenerated smooth latent spaces. The results demonstrated thebenets of including self-attention to deep generative models, and the authors concluded there is a trade-o ﬀbetween variational models in terms of their ability to properly reconstruct input dataand their ability to embed complex information about the inputs into a continuous latent space. We modi ed these three models to take as input and output sequences of up to y amino acids rather than SMILES strings. In addition, we derived two moremodels, an adversarial autoencoder (AAE), 42and a Wasserstein autoencoder (WAE),43by modifying the latent spaces and archi- tectures of the original three. The RNN model (Fig. 1A) is a traditional VAE featuring a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)-based Recurrent Neural Network(RNN) as the encoder and as the decoder.44The RNN model rst embeds the input sequences into xed length vectors of length 128. The embedded vectors are then passed to the GRU, with N =3 layers, that generates a hidden layer vector of length 128. The hidden layer is layer-normalized and sent to two separatelinear layers, the mean layer ( m) and the log-variance layer ( s). The linear layers act as the “bottleneck ”and changes –where necessary –the GRU output shape to the appropriate latent space vector shape –either 32, 64 or 128 dimensions, depending on which architecture is being trained. The mean and logvar output are then combined according to the reparametrizationtrick and Gaussian noise is added. 16A ReLU unit followed by a layernorm is then applied to the noisy memories. Theresulting vector is sent to the decoder GRU. The decoderoutputs a 128 dimensional hidden vector that passes througha layernorm. Finally, this hidden vector is sent through a linearlayer that generates token predictions. All models except the Fig. 1 Schematic of the ﬁve deep learning model architectures, highlighting their similarities and di ﬀerences. The RNN (A) features a GRU encoder, a variational latent space and a GRU decoder. The RNN-Attention (B) inserts an attention layer after the encoder GRU and usesconvolutional layers as input and output from the variational latent space. The AAE (C) features a non-variational latent space but inserts a discriminator network at the latent space. The WAE (D) also features a non-variational latent space but calculates the maximum mean discrepancy between Gaussian noise and the encoder generated latent space. The Transformer (E) model implements the generic architecturewith a ﬁrst self-attention layer then a convolutional layer into the latent space followed by deconvolution into the masked attention and the ﬁnal self-attention layer. 444 |Digital Discovery ,2 0 2 3 , 2,4 4 1 –458 © 2023 The Author(s). Published by the Royal Society of ChemistryDigital Discovery Paper Open Access Article. Published on 16 Februar 2023. Downloaded on 18.04.2026 04:01:00. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 3.0 Unported Licence. View Article Online Transformer implement a GRU with teacher forcing during training. Teacher forcing passes the true sequence to the decoder along with the latent vector and improves trainingstability by removing the requirement of learning entiresequences and instead prohibits the accumulation of errors onindividual tokens. The Adversarial Autoencoder (AAE) model (Fig. 1B) uses the same GRU model as the RNN but exchanges the re-parameterized latent space proposed in Kingma and Welling 16 for an adversarial counterpart Makhzani et al.42As proposed in ref. 42 this model regularizes the latent space with an attachedneural network, named the discriminator, that matches theaggregated posterior q(z) to the desired prior p(z), which in this model is a Gaussian prior. The discriminator is a fully con-nected network with 256 hidden layers, each with a xed hidden vector of size 640. The encoder network acts as the embedder forthe decoder and the “generator ”for the discriminator. The decoder learns to reconstruct original data, as in the RNN model case, and the discriminator discriminates between anideal prior, modeled by a vector lled with normally distributed noise as a proxy for a Gaussian prior, and the current latentvector. This model is hypothesised to perform well on recon-struction tasks given the relative success of adversarial modelson the task of image generation. 45,46 The WAE model proposed in Tolstikhin et al.43introduced a new family of regularized autoencoders under the name Wasserstein Autoencoders that minimize the optimal transportW c(p(x),p′(x)), where p(x) is the true data distribution and p′(x)i s the generative model data distribution, for a cost function c. The WAE's regularizer, computed as part of the overall loss function, forces the continuous mixture qfðzÞ¼Ð qfðzjxÞdpðxÞ to match the prior p(z) instead of forcing each input to match the prior as done in the VAE, where qf(zjx=xi) for all input iin x. The WAE constructed in this work (Fig. 1C), uses the MMD penalty for prior regularization.47The WAE implemented uses the same model as the RNN but exchanges the split latent space with a single linear layer. The regularization is performed in theloss function, where the inverse multi-quadratic kernel basisfunction is used and the MMD is computed between this latentvector and a vector with values sampled from a normaldistribution. The RNN-Attention (RNN-Attention) model (Fig. 1D), attaches a single self-attention head a er the GRU of the RNN model to leverage the attention mechanism. 48The attention mechanism allows a model to store sequence wide connectionweights between tokens in a sequence. Each token in thesequence is made to “attend ”and give a 
=========================================
