【文献归属领域】: AMP 预测模型(SerpApi)
【文献标题】: Progress in the identification and design of novel antimicrobial peptides against pathogenic microorganisms
【出版信息】: S Sun - Probiotics and Antimicrobial Proteins, 2025 - Springer
【引用次数】: 21
【PDF 直链】: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s12602-024-10402-4.pdf

【摘要】: … This study demonstrated that earthworms served as a new … Currently, the antimicrobial peptide LL-37 is recognized as a … and through discrimination and generation approaches, a …

=========================================
【SerpApi PDF 全文/核心正文提取】:
Vol:.(1234567890)Probiotics and Antimicrobial Proteins (2025) 17:918–936 https://doi.org/10.1007/s12602-024-10402-4 REVIEW Progress in the Identification and Design of Novel Antimicrobial Peptides Against Pathogenic Microorganisms Shengwei Sun1,2 Accepted: 11 November 2024 / Published online: 18 November 2024 © The Author(s) 2024 Abstract The occurrence and spread of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) pose a looming threat to human health around the world. Novel antibiotics are urgently needed to address the AMR crisis. In recent years, antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) have gained increasing attention as potential alternatives to conventional antibiotics due to their abundant sources, structural diversity, broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity, and ease of production. Given its significance, there has been a tremendous advance- ment in the research and development of AMPs. Numerous AMPs have been identified from various natural sources (e.g., plant, animal, human, microorganism) based on either well-established isolation or bioinformatic pipelines. Moreover, computer-assisted strategies (e.g., machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL)) have emerged as a powerful and promising technology for the accurate prediction and design of new AMPs. It may overcome some of the shortcomings of traditional antibiotic discovery and contribute to the rapid development and translation of AMPs. In these cases, this review aims to appraise the latest advances in identifying and designing AMPs and their significant antimicrobial activities against a wide range of bacterial pathogens. The review also highlights the critical challenges in discovering and applying AMPs. Keywords Antibiotics · Antimicrobial resistance · Antimicrobial peptides · Identification and design · Bacterial pathogens Introduction The discovery of antibiotics represents one of the most nota- ble achievements in medical history [1 ]. They are exten- sively used to treat many diseases and save countless lives. However, due to the overuse and/or misuse of antibiotics, the occurrence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is now a serious and ongoing problem worldwide. Various multi- drug-resistant microbial species have rapidly emerged and spread, and infections caused by drug-resistant pathogens have represented the leading cause of death in humans [2 ]. The World Health Organization (WHO) declared AMR one of the top three health challenges [3 ]. To fight against this, new antibiotics or effective antibiotic alternatives are urgently needed. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are typically a type of small peptides composed of short amino acid sequences. They are structurally diverse, with four major categories being recognized, including (i) α-helical, (ii) β-sheet, (iii) αβ, or (iv) non-αβ conformations [4 ]. AMPs are highly effective against bacteria, fungi, viruses, parasites, and can- cer cells. They are integral to the host immune system and ubiquitous in all living organisms [5 ]. Unlike most conven- tional antibiotics, AMPs generally target the bacterial cell membrane and kill bacteria by disrupting the integrity of the membrane [6 ]. A growing body of studies also suggests AMPs may act on the cell wall, inhibit protein synthesis or enzyme activity, or act on nucleic acids intracellularly [7]. Thus, the possibility of developing resistance to AMPs is minimal [8 ]. These characteristics make AMPs serve as promising alternatives to current antibiotics. The past few decades have witnessed exponential growth in identifying novel AMPs with great potential for applications in medi- cine, agriculture, food, and aquaculture [9 ]. They have been achieved from numerous organisms, including plants, ani- mals, humans, and microorganisms, using either traditional * Shengwei Sun ssw0929@163.com; shengw@kth.se 1 School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health, Department of Fibre and Polymer Technology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 100 44 Stockholm, Sweden 2 School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health, Science for Life Laboratory, Tomtebodavägen 23, 171 65 Solna, Sweden 919 Probiotics and Antimicrobial Proteins (2025) 17:918–936 separation and purification methods or classical omics min- ing (e.g., genomics, transcriptomics, peptidomics, proteom- ics, and metabolomics) based on/beyond sequencing projects [10]. Modern computational design methods like machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) are also being imple- mented, accelerating the discovery of new AMPs with a broad range of targets and alternative effects [11]. This review summarizes the recent advances in identi- fying novel AMPs from various sources (e.g., plants, ani- mals, humans, and microorganisms) based on conventional and bioinformatic approaches. It also describes the role of computational design methods in discovering and collecting new AMPs (Fig. 1). The review further discusses the current challenges in identifying and applying AMPs. Altogether, this review provides a focused and up-to-date analysis of AMPs in response to the demands of the AMR crisis within the 2021–2024 timeframe. Methods for the Identification and Design of AMPs At present, traditional column-based isolation and purifica- tion, bioinformatic approaches, and computer-assisted tools (e.g., machine learning, deep learning) are being used to generate novel AMP molecules. Conventional column sepa- ration and purification methods are mainly used for min- ing and identification of AMPs from protease hydrolysates or microbial fermentation media. Peptides from different sources can be extracted and purified through techniques such as solid-phase extraction, ion exchange chromatogra- phy, gel-permeation chromatography (GPC), affinity chro- matography, membrane filtration, and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) [12]. These techniques vary, depending on the nature of the peptide and its use. After iso - lation and purification of the target peptide, a number of key techniques are required to characterize the AMPs, includ- ing (1) amino acid analysis, (2) sequencing, (3) GPC, (4) sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), and (5) mass spectrometry (MS). In addition, infrared spectroscopy, circular dichroism (CD), and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy have been widely used to reveal the secondary and tertiary structures of AMPs [13]. The traditional mining methods have been considered time-consuming and laborious, showing a decline in the discovery of new AMPs. To improve the efficiency, genom- ics, transcriptomics, peptidomics, proteomics, and metabo- lomics, coupled with bioinformatics and biostatistics, have been applied to the investigation and exploration of novel AMPs (Fig. 2). Genomics is the study of the complete genome of organism by decoding the genetic code within the genetic materials (such as DNA sequence) [14]. The genome of a specific species needs to be analyzed to predict AMP coding sequences, and then bioinformatics analyses, such as domain classification and structural modeling analyses based Fig. 1 Identification and design of active AMPs from various sources. AMPs can be identified from rich natural sources (e.g., plant, animal, human, microorganism) using traditional column-based isola- tion and purification or bioinformatic approaches. Computer-assisted tools (e.g., machine learning, deep learning) can also be utilized to generate new AMP molecules. Subsequently, the active AMPs will be screened out using in vitro or in vivo experimental validation analyses 920 Probiotics and Antimicrobial Proteins (2025) 17:918–936 on homology-based functional assignments and predicted peptide sequences, are used to identify candidate genomic loci encoding AMP. Comparative genomics is utilized to understand evolutionary, structural, and functional differ - ences in AMP genes by comparing genetic information within and between organisms [15]. Recently, advances in sequencing technology and assembly algorithms have ena- bled the sequencing of large genomes and have provided a wealth of data for comparative genomic analysis of AMPs. Genomics studies aim to understand AMP genes at the genomic level, while transcriptomics studies determine the involvement of gene expression for specific functions [16]. In brief, it refers to the study of gene transcription and the laws of transcriptional regulation in cells. The gene encod- ing AMP can be investigated at the RNA (generally mRNA) level. A high-throughput sequencing platform is usually employed to sequence the transcribed mRNA. Through reverse transcribing the mRNA into cDNA, and then per - forming high-throughput sequencing of the resulting cDNA, a large amount of sequence data is generated [17]. The quan- titative information can be further achieved by comparing the sequences to the genome or reference database for gene annotation, differential analysis, enrichment analysis, and prediction of potential new AMP genes. In recent years, peptidomics has emerged as a research hotspot in the comprehensive qualitative and quantitative analysis of peptidomes in biological samples [18]. The peptidomics studies focus on obtaining sequences of large numbers of AMPs from HPLC and mass spectrometry (MS) data, which offers the great advantage of providing infor - mation on individual peptides, even in very complex mix- tures. Combined with bioinformatics analysis (e.g., database alignment, modeling analysis, function/activity prediction), AMPs in candidate sequences are mined. Similarly, prot- eomics studies involve the systematic analysis of proteins that perform various functions in cells, tissues, or organs [19]. The goal of the field of proteomics is to elucidate the assembly, function, modification, interaction, and regulation of proteins, thereby providing valuable knowledge about the dynamic characterization of cellular processes. MS-based proteomics has become an important tool for identifying and quantifying numerous proteins, including these small- molecule AMPs, with excellent sensitivity and the ability to analyze complex protein samples. Lastly, metabolomics analysis aims to determine the profile of metabolites pro- duced in biological systems and the metabolite abundance in time and space [20]. In the context of mining AMPs, metabolomics approaches can be applied in several fields. The well-known classical approach is to analyze second- ary metabolites produced by soil bacteria. Some of these secondary metabolites may exhibit antimicrobial activity, and these compounds can be further identified, purified, and characterized for the next analysis. As AMP research progresses, new advances have fueled ongoing efforts to develop computational methods for accurate AMP prediction, such as machine learning, aimed at significantly reducing the time and effort required for experimental identification. Advanced computational meth- ods used in AMP discovery, including machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL), are discussed in the section “Machine Learning and Deep Learning”. Recent Advances in the Identification of AMPs Plant‑Derived AMPs Plants produce an array of secondary metabolites, includ- ing antimicrobial peptides, which form an effective defense system against invasion by insects, bacteria, and fungi [21]. The composition of AMPs, even in a single plant, is quite complicated. They have a variety of structures, functions, expression patterns, and targets [22]. Previously, many plant AMPs have been identified and isolated, such as thionins, defensins, lipid transfer proteins, knottin-type peptides, α-hairpinin family peptides, and snakins [23]. Recently, the nodule-specific cysteine-rich (NCR) small peptides from legume plants have attracted increasing attention, because they have significant antimicrobial activity against human, animal, and plant bacterial and fungal pathogens. For example, 50 NCR peptides from Cicer arietinum, Galega Fig. 2 Overview of different omics approaches such as genomics, transcriptomics, peptidomics, proteomics, and metabolomics applied in the identification of AMPs in biological samples 921 Probiotics and Antimicrobial Proteins (2025) 17:918–936 orientalis, M. truncatula, M. sativa, and Pisum sativum were chemically synthesized and found to exhibit antimi- crobial activity against eight human pathogens [24]. The most potent AMPs killed bacteria at different concentra - tions (0.8–3.1 μM). Positive net charge and high isoelectric point might be responsible for their antimicrobial activity. Moreover, experiments on the activity of shorter peptide derivatives led to the identification of key regions, which played an important role in the antimicrobial action. Simi- larly, three other novel NCR peptides (NCR888, NCR992, and NCR094) were identified from the legume plant, Med- icago truncatula, and showed an inhibitory activity against the methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Klebsiella pneumoniae based on in vitro and ex vivo assays (e.g., antimicrobial activity, antibiofilm activity, tox - icity profiling) [25]. Notably, NCR992 and NCR094 killed K. pneumoniae completely at 50 and 25 µM, respectively. Apart from these endogenous AMPs, an increasing number of AMPs identified from plant protein hydrolysates using enzymatic hydrolysis has been reported [ 26]. Plant seed protein represents an important source of AMPs. For example, a novel AMP, namely MOp3, was achieved using a one-step procedure combining cell membrane chroma- tography (CMC) and live bacteria adsorption from seed protein hydrolysates of Moringa oleifera and identified by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/ MS) [27]. MOp3 (sequence: MCNDCGA) exhibited the maximum inhibitory effect on the pathogen S. aureus (MIC value = 2 mg/mL). Further study suggested that MOp3 could increase cell membrane permeability and reduce the activities of intracellular AKP, LDH, and ATPase, eventu - ally leading to irreversible membrane damage to S. aureus cells [28]. Moreover, cells treated with MOp3 showed ROS accumulation, nuclear rupture, and DNA fragmentation, causing cell apoptosis. Similarly, another novel AMP, MOp2 (sequence: HVLDTPLL), was identified and characterized from Moringa oleifera seed protein hydrolysates using LC–MS/MS and circular dichroism (CD) spectra [29]. The chemically synthesized peptide displayed a β-sheet struc- ture and a significant inhibitory activity against S. aureus (MIC value = 2.204 mM). It also showed high stability, with more than 90% of antimicrobial activity maintained under 5% salt and 78% of antimicrobial activity retained at a high temperature of 115 °C for 30 min. Further mechanism study revealed that MOp2 increased the membrane permeability of S. aureus cells, causing irreversible damage to the cell membrane and releasing intracellular nucleotide pools. Animal‑Derived AMPs The ubiquitous exposure of animals to pathogens daily through physical contact, ingestion, and inhalation is well- established [30]. Over the past decade, the role of AMPs in animal innate immunity to avoid infection and protect the host has become increasingly evident. Hence, animals are a crucial source of AMP. The literature search reveals that in recent years, many AMPs have been found mainly in aquatic animals (such as fish, crabs, and shellfish) and mammals (Table 1). For instance, several active AMPs were purified from the epidermis of catfish (Clarias batra- chus) using reverse-phase ultra-fast liquid chromatogra - phy (UFLC) and determined using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) [31]. They showed broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity against bacterial pathogens, including multidrug-resistant clinical isolates and fungal organisms. Of these, the 25 kDa peptide had high homology to pleurocidin-like peptide (Plp ) from a fish Pleuronectes americanus based on the BLAST analy - sis and Mascot search. A new AMP Spasin141-165 derived from marine crab Scylla paramamosain was identified based on the analysis of the constructed transcriptome database, which exhibited strong and broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal activity at MICs ranging from 0.75 to 48 μM [32]. It was able to kill Acinetobacter baumannii and S. aureus within 90 min and 2 h, respectively. Mechanistic studies sug- gested that Spasin141-165 changed the cell membrane perme- ability of bacterial pathogens, resulting in ATP release and intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation. Additionally, using nanoLC-ESI–MS-MS technology and bioinformatic predictions (e.g., CAMPR3, AMP scanner vr.2, iAMPpred) allowed the identification of three novel AMPs (Nv-p1, Nv-p2, and Nv-p3) from the marine mollusk Nerita versicolor [ 33]. They all adopted a random coil struc- ture and exhibited inhibitory activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Among them, Nv-p3 demonstrated the highest inhibitory activity at a MIC of 1.5 µg/mL in the radial dif- fusion assays. They also demonstrated effective antibiofilm activity against Candida albicans, Candida parapsilosis, and Candida auris. Milk protein-derived AMPs have gained extensive attention owing to their broad range of antimicrobial activ - ities, the safety of raw materials, and the slow development of AMR [34]. For example, utilizing bioinformatics tech- niques (including online server BIOPEP-UWM, CAMP database, APD2 database, and hidden Markov models (HMMs)) identified a novel AMP in lactoferrin of camel milk, which showed the inhibitory effect on the growth of pathogenic bacteria A. baumannii , P. aeruginosa , and S. aureus with MIC values of 62.5, 31.25, and 31.25 μg/ mL, respectively [35]. Iram et al. obtained several AMPs from goat milk fermented with Lactobacillus rhamnosus C25 [36]. These AMPs were released through proteolysis of the goat milk proteins with proteolytic enzymes from Lactobacillus strains. The peptide fractions were collected using ultrafiltration with different-sized MWCO (< 10, < 5, and < 3 kDa) membranes and analyzed using RP-HPLC 922 Probiotics and Antimicrobial Proteins (2025) 17:918–936 Table 1 AMPs identified from various animal sources Source Method Sequence Activity Mechanism Ref Chinese horseshoe crab Transcriptome analysis MCHKAMLTLVVLIALCGIMKT A broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity against Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria and fungiBy directly binding to LPS, DNA, and chitin[42] Mytilus coruscus Transcriptomic data HYKGCPFNQHRCHVYCLSH- GCKGGY CGG WFRLKCK - CIGC, etcResponse to different microbes in immune-related tissues/ [43] African Catfish Peptide extraction and isolation AALKKALTAGGY, AALKKA - LAAGGY, FGGAGVGKTVL, etcExhibiting antimicrobial activity on E. coli and S. aureus/ [44] Sturgeon (Acipenser ruthenus) SpermaryEnzymatic hydrolysis and purifica- tionNDEELNKLM and RSSKRRQ Excellent inhibitory activity against E. coli with an inhibitory rate of 76.46%Interacting with the DNA gyrase and dihydrofolate reductase of E. coli via salt bridges and hydrogen bonds[45] Fish gelatin hydrolysates Peptidomics and bioinformatics GPLGAAGP (P1), GRDGEP (P2), and MTGTQGEAGR (P3)Antibacterial activity against E. coli, P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, and K. pneumoniae, and the inhibitory potential of angiotensin-convert- ing enzyme (ACE) and dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP-IV)Sufficient binding energy to inhibit both ACE and DPP-IV enzymes, with excellent three-dimensional conformation[46] Mandarin fish (Siniperca chuatsi) Transcriptomes data MKCTALFLVLSLV, IFHHIFK - GIVHVGK, MKGLSLVLLV - LLLMLAVGEG, etcPlaying a key role in mandarin fish in defense against A. hydrophila infection/ [47] European Sea Bass (Dicentrarchus labrax)Whole-genome shotgun sequence MAYYRVVALALLVVLLLNV - VENEAASFPWSCPSLSG- VCRKVCLPTELFFGPLGCGK - GFLCCVSHFL, etc/ / [48] Medaka (Oryzias latipes) fish Isolation and mass spectrometric analysisIRIILRAQGALKI A broad-spectrum toxicity against pathogenic bacteria including drug-resistant strainsInducing deregulation of periplas- mic peptidyl-prolyl isomerases and reducing the RNA level of an upstream regulator of envelope stress responses[49] Golden pompano, Trachinotus ovatusComparative genomics / Participating in the immune response to the infection with S. agalactiae and C. irritans through the MAPK signaling pathway/ [50] Hirudinaria manillensis Bioinformatic analysis RKYKEKKDKSQNKKKKRKC- MILExhibiting good antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, with a MIC of 6.25 μg/mLAn obvious disruption of the plasma membrane and inhibition of biofilm formation and promo- tion of biofilm eradication in S. aureus[51] 923 Probiotics and Antimicrobial Proteins (2025) 17:918–936 and LC–MS/MS. In silico analysis indicated that most of these AMPs (< 5 kDa) showed maximum antibacte- rial activity against E. coli, E. faecalis, and S. typhi and natural cationic properties, which was an important fac- tor for the interaction with the bacterial negative charge membrane. Among these, AMPs (IGHFKLIFSLLRV and KSFCPAPVAPPPPT) exhibited low ligand binding energy of − 7.5 and − 7.6 kcal/mol, respectively, for MurD, a Mur ligase capable of regulating peptidoglycan (PG) biosyn- thesis in order to maintain the relative thickness of the PG layer in Gram-negative bacteria [37]. Besides, newly identified AMPs from spiders, Monocha- mus alternatus, and earthworms indicate that the animal kingdom equipped with versatile self-defense mechanisms is a rich source of natural AMPs. Specifically, a novel AMP, namely, Lycotoxin-Pa2a, with potent antibacterial activity was identified from the spider venom gland transcriptome library of the spider Pardosa astrigera through a homolo- gous sequence search [38]. Structure prediction revealed that the peptide formed antiparallel β-strand and α-helix at both N-terminus and C-terminus, which were commonly found in toxin peptides. Lycotoxin-Pa2a (Lytx-Pa2a) showed com- parable or even stronger antibacterial activity than melit- tin against pathogens based on colony formation and MIC assays. Mechanism studies suggested that Lytx-Pa2a could disrupt both the cell’s inner and outer membranes and induce ROS accumulation simultaneously. Han et al. isolated and identified a novel knottin-type AMP derived from Monocha- mus alternatus based on the transcriptome data [39]. The knottin peptide (MaK) was composed of 34 amino acids, of which 11 amino acid residues were in an extended strand conformation, 4 amino acid residues formed a β-turn, and 19 amino acid residues were in a randomly coiled configuration. It showed superior stability, low toxicity, and the capacity to suppress pine wood nematodes. Particularly, MaK exhibited significant antibacterial activity with a MIC of 36.29 µg/ mL against Bacillus thuringiensis and E. coli and 72.58 µg/ mL against Serratia marcescens. Additionally, a novel AMP, named EWAMP-R (RIWWSGGW RRW RW), was identi- fied based on the prediction and sequence optimization of potential AMPs from the open reading frames (ORFs) in the Eisenia andrei genome [40]. A number of ORFs were read and translated into amino acid sequences using NCBI ORFfinder, and the potential AMPs were predicted using CAMPR3 [41]. As a result, EWAMP-R demonstrated excel- lent antimicrobial activity against various bacteria, including drug-resistant E. coli and S. aureus (MIC of 16 μg/mL and 16 μg/mL, respectively), by disrupting bacterial cell mem- brane integrity. This study demonstrated that earthworms served as a new source of antibacterial agents in response to the AMR issue. More examples of newly identified AMPs from animal sources are shown in Table 1.Table 1 (continued) Source Method Sequence Activity Mechanism Ref Chinese tubular cone snail Multi-omics (genomics, transcrip- tomics, and peptidomics) dataNAPGIYARTGLFLKWIEDTIRQ, VLELAGNAARDNKKTRI- IPRHLQL, RAKRRIQY, etcShowing inhibition activity against gram-negative bacteria E. coli and gram-positive bacteria S. dysga- lactiae and M. luteus/ [52] Sheep milk Lactobacillus plantarum (KGL3A) fermentation and LC/MSSPAQTLQWQVLPNAVPAK, GPFPILF, SCQDQPTAMAR, AMKPWTQPKTNAIPYVRY, IPAVFL, and KFWGKYLY - EVARShowing antimicrobial properties against E. coli, S. typhimurium, E. faecalis, and B. cereus/ [53] Mare’s milk and koumiss Peptidomics GNYDAAQRGPGGA WAA KVIS, GNYDAAQRGPGGA WAA KVISDARES, FLKEAGQGAK - DMWRA, etcHaving antimicrobial activity and significant and stable antibacterial effectsInhibiting S. aureus by changing its morphology and killing it via the induction of protein leakage[54] “/” stands for “not available”. 924 Probiotics and Antimicrobial Proteins (2025) 17:918–936 Human‑Derived AMPs Human-derived AMPs protect humans from microbial infec- tions through a variety of mechanisms [55]. Various types of AMPs, such as defensins [56], granulysins [57], histatins [58], thrombocidins [59], and cathelicidins [60], are pro- duced in humans. They have been identified in many tis- sues or surfaces such as the eyes, skin, ears, mouth, lungs, intestines, and urinar
=========================================
