【文献归属领域】: AMP 预测模型(SerpApi)
【文献标题】: AMP‐BERT: Prediction of antimicrobial peptide function based on a BERT model
【出版信息】: H Lee, S Lee, I Lee, H Nam - Protein Science, 2023 - Wiley Online Library
【引用次数】: 115
【PDF 直链】: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9793967/pdf/PRO-32-e4529.pdf

【摘要】: … In conclusion, our proposed model for AMP prediction demonstrated the value of deep-learning methods as a pre-screening measure for AMP-based drug candidates, which in turn can …

=========================================
【SerpApi PDF 全文/核心正文提取】:
TOOLS FOR PROTEIN SCIENCE AMP-BERT: Prediction of antimicrobial peptide function based on a BERT model Hansol Lee1| Songyeon Lee1| Ingoo Lee1| Hojung Nam1,2 1School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Gwangju Institute ofScience and Technology (GIST), Gwangju,South Korea 2AI Graduate School, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju,South Korea Correspondence Hojung Nam, AI Graduate School,Gwangju Institute of Science andTechnology, 123 Cheomdangwagi-ro,Buk-gu, Gwangju, 61005, South Korea.Email: hjnam@gist.ac.kr Funding informationInstitute for Information andCommunications Technology Promotion,Grant/Award Number: 2019-0-01842;National Research Foundation of Korea,Grant/Award Number: NRF-2020R1A2C2004628 Review Editor: Nir Ben-TalAbstract Antimicrobial resistance is a growing health concern. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) disrupt harmful microorganisms by nonspecific mechanisms, making it difficult for microbes to develop resistance. Accordingly, they are promising alternatives to traditional antimicrobial drugs. In this study, we developed an improved AMP classification model, called AMP-BERT. We propose a deep learning model with a fine-tuned didirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT) architecture designed to extract structural/functionalinformation from input peptides and identify each input as AMP or non-AMP. We compared the performance of our proposed model and other machine/ deep learning-based methods. Our model, AMP-BERT, yielded the best predic- tion results among all models evaluated with our curated external dataset. In addition, we utilized the attention mechanism in BERT to implement an inter-pretable feature analysis and determine the specific residues in known AMPs that contribute to peptide structure and antimicrobial function. The results show that AMP-BERT can capture the structural properties of peptides for model learning, enabling the prediction of AMPs or non-AMPs from input sequences. AMP-BERT is expected to contribute to the identification of candi- date AMPs for functional validation and drug development. The code and dataset for the fine-tuning of AMP-BERT is publicly available at https:// github.com/GIST-CSBL/AMP-BERT . KEYWORDS antimicrobial peptides, antimicrobial resistance, BERT, deep learning, drug discovery, machine learning, sequence classification, transformer 1|INTRODUCTION Antimicrobial resistance is a major threat to human health and agriculture worldwide (World HealthOrganization, 2014 ), with the potential to cause pan- demics comparable to or worse than the COVID-19 epi- demic that began in 2020 (Nieuwlaat et al., 2021 ). Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are naturally occurringshort proteins from all domains of life; they have been actively researched with the aim of combatingantimicrobial-resistant microbes. Unlike traditional anti- biotics, AMPs typically kill bacteria and other harmful microbes by disrupting general components of a cell, such as the membrane and DNA duplication mecha-nisms (Zasloff, 2002 ). Owing to these nonspecific mecha- nisms by which AMPs kill microbes, they are considered a novel and viable alternative to conventional drugs for the treatment of microbial infections caused by bacteria,viruses, and fungi and even for the treatment of cancer (Reddy et al., 2004 ). Therefore, it is imperative to identifyReceived: 12 July 2022 Revised: 5 November 2022 Accepted: 30 November 2022 DOI: 10.1002/pro.4529 Protein Science. 2023;32:e4529. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/pro © 2022 The Protein Society. 1o f1 3 https://doi.org/10.1002/pro.4529 candidate AMPs and their properties to protect against resistant microbes. AMP-related bioinformatics r esearch incorporates vari- ous biological/chemical data types with computational methods to identify candidate peptides with antimicrobialfunctions. Previously proposed machine learning methods for AMP classification include CAMPr3 (Waghu et al., 2016), iAMPpred (Meher et al., 2017), AmPEP (Bhadra et al., 2018), AntiBP2 (Lata et al., 2010), and CS- AMPPred (Porto et al., 2012). These methods utilize a vari- ety of physicochemical properties, such as amino acid com-position (AAC), pseudo amino acid composition (PseAAC),charge, isoelectric point, hydrophobicity, polarity, and sec- ondary structure, as input features. These features are pro- cessed by algorithms, such as random forest(Breiman, 2001) and support vector machine (Noble, 2006), to make binary classification predictions, labeling each input peptide as either “AMP ”or“non-AMP. ” In addition to machine learning methods, several deep learning-based methods (LeCun et al., 2015 ) have been developed in recent years to classify peptides aspotential AMPs, such as AMPscanner (Veltri et al., 2018 ), APIN (Su et al., 2019 ), and ACEP (Fu et al., 2020 ). A ben- efit of deep neural networks over machine learningmethods is the potential for automatic feature extractionfrom raw input data (e.g., amino acid sequences and images). Prior feature engineering is unnecessary because deep learning models use multiple data-processing layersto extract higher-level features from the raw input, which can subsequently be used for classification (Ravì et al., 2016 ). The aforementioned models utilize one or more of the following layers in their architecture that are often used in deep neural networks: convolutional, long short-term memory (LSTM), Bi-LSTM, and attention. Data-driven computational al gorithms are continuously improved in the field of artificial intelligence, providing a basis for the enhancement of AMP classification models. H o w e v e r ,t h e r ea r es t i l li s s u e st ob er e s o l v e dd e s p i t er e c e n tadvances. The drawback of existing machine learning-based models is that the raw input data must be engineered into features that contain useful inf ormation for solving the pre- diction problem in question before being used for model learning. In addition, it is essential to validate the robust- ness of trained models by evaluating their prediction perfor-mance on a distinct external dataset. Nevertheless, the existing deep learning-based models for classifying AMPs have not been evaluated object ively using external data, which should be addressed. F urthermore, most architec- tures are black-box and cannot output results that are easily interpretable, limiting follow-up analyses of the most rele- vant features during model training and learning.We developed a new model, called AMP-BERT, that improves upon existing AMP classification models in twoways: (1) it makes more accurate class predictions with external data, and (2) it suggests important peptide resi- dues that contribute to its classification process in addi-tion to sheer prediction evaluation metrics (e.g., accuracy, sensitivity, specificity). We fine-tuned a natural language processing (NLP)-based, deep neuralnetwork that incorporates a pre-trained bidirectional encoder representation from transformers (BERT) (Devlin et al., 2018 ) architecture from ProtTrans (Elnaggar et al., 2020 ). Different from traditional deep learning networks such as convolutional or LSTM net- works that capture only local or long-range context of sequential data, BERT utilizes positional encoding tolearn the global contextual information of its input sequences (Devlin et al., 2018 ). Furthermore, our fine- tuned model is able to use BERT's attention mechanismto make better predictions and implement a subsequent self-attention analysis that captures important structural features in AMPs. In general, the attention mechanismhelps explain an NLP model's decision-making process that is not interpretable with traditional, black-box deep learning methods by indicating which parts of inputsequences the model finds more relevant for solving itsgiven task(s) (Supplementary Note). In terms of our model, the analysis reveals features that contribute to the antimicrobial function of peptides, with individual atten-tion scores assigned to each amino acid. The overall workflow of AMP-BERT is depicted in Figure 1. 2|RESULTS 2.1 |Fine-tuning cross-validation performance evaluation We first implement 10-fold cross-validation of binary classification with AMP-BERT five separate times on a training set of 1778 AMPs and 1778 non-AMPs to demon- strate the model's potential to generalize to external data.The prediction results for validation using the training sequences were as follows: when averaged across all folds and repeats, the model accuracy (ACC) was 0.9280, areaunder the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) was 0.9665, area under the precision-recall curve (AUPR) was 0.9653, sensitivity (SN) was 0.9262, specificity (SP) was0.9303, and F1 score was 0.9278 (Figure 2). The model performance confirms that our model can be adequately applied to unseen data after learning with training samples.2o f1 3 LEE ET AL . 2.2 |Model comparison using external data We compared the binary class prediction performance of our fine-tuned model and three machine/deep learning-based models using a curated external test set of 2065 AMPs and 1908 non-AMPs. Figure 3shows the predic- tion results of the external test evaluation. AMP-BERToutperforms the CTD +RF model in all metrics, and out- performs AMPscanner in all metrics except for SN; although our model does not perform as well in SN, itsSP performance is 10% higher than that of AMPscanner, and therefore has a higher ACC and F1 score which take both positive and negative samples into account. Simi-larly, AMP-BERTsub (predicted only on the sequenceswith position-specific scoring matrix [PSSM] information available) outperforms ACEP in all metrics except for SN. These results revealed that AMP-BERT was superior FIGURE 1 Overview of AMP-BERT. (a) Creating AMP-BERT: Each amino acid sequence is tokenized as single residues for data representation with positional encoding (using sinusoidal function), and the BERT encoder layers derived from the pre-trained ProtBERT-BFD model are fine-tuned for the downstream AMP classification task with the help of a fully-connected layer and sigmoid function. (b) Evaluating AMP-BERT's prediction performance on external test data: The fine-tuned model is evaluated using multiple metrics and compared against other benchmark methods. An additional instance of AMP prediction on a subset of test sequences with PSSMinformation available is implemented to properly compare against a previously reported model. A subsequent attention analysis of sequence residues is also implemented. AMP, antimicrobial peptides; CLS, class token; FC layer, fully-connected layer; PAD, padding token; SEP, separator token FIGURE 2 Prediction performance metrics for 5-repeated 10-fold cross-validation in the fine-tuning step. ACC, accuracy;AMP, antimicrobial peptides; AUROC, area under the receiver- operating characteristic curve; AUPR, area under the precision- recall curve; SN, sensitivity; SP, specificity.LEE ET AL . 3o f1 3 to other benchmark methods for AMP prediction. The detailed evaluation scores for the models are presented inTables 1and2. 2.3 |Case study with attention analysis Most current deep learning research on AMP classifica- tion focuses solely on prediction performance and does not provide any human-recognizable interpretation of the models' decision-making process. Hence, anotheradvantage of our model over comparable benchmarkmethods is the potential for human-interpretableanalyses based on the attention weights from the fine- tuned BERT layers. Our model tokenizes the amino acidsequences by single residues, which enables the identifi- cation of previously discovered structural characteristics related to AMP function, such as alpha-helix, beta-sheet,etc., with attention to each amino acid in a given sequence. This knowledge could then be applied to sub- sequent in vitro research. An important structural characteristic of AMPs asso- ciated with antimicrobial function is the presence of disulfide bonds, as a result of comprising multiple cyste-ine residues (Wedemeyer et al., 2000 ). Cysteine residues consist of sulfur atoms that can bond to each other, creat- ing“bridges ”between the residues that are located in dif- ferent parts of the sequence. These bridges help form amore rigid and stable AMP structure, contributing to their antimicrobial function. In contrast, peptides with- out disulfide bridges in their structures are mostlyα-helical or unstructured. One example of an AMP from the curated external test set with two disulfide bridges is Siamycin II (Index: DRAMP18350, PubChem CID:16130326). Derived from Streptomyces strain AA3891, Siamycin II has experimentally demonstrated antiviral, or more specifically, anti-HIV effects (Tsunakawaet al., 1995 ). The C1 and C13 residues form one bridge and the C7 and C19 residues form another bridge. Our model comprises a layer in the BERT module that reflects such properties, as shown in Figure 4. The visualizations show all residues throughout the sequence focusing their attention on their neighboring cysteines, indicating the importance of the bridge-forming residues. The entropyvalues of the attention scores for all BERT layers show considerable variation in Figure 4a, which demonstrates AMP-BERT's capability of attending to an input sequence TABLE 1 Prediction performance metrics for the external test dataset.Model SN SP F1 ACC AUROC AUPR CTD+RF 0.6536 0.598 0.6495 0.63 0.6735 0.6586 AMPscanner 0.8412 0.6347 0.7722 0.742 0.7884 0.7621 AMP-BERT 0.8760 0.6352 0.7917 0.7604 0.8183 0.7866 Note: The highest scores are highlighted in bold. Abbreviations: ACC, accuracy; AUPR, area under the precision-recall curve; AUROC, area under thereceiver-operating characteristic curve; SN, sensitivity; SP, specificity. TABLE 2 Prediction performance metrics for the external test datasetcontaining only the sequences with position-specific scoring matrix information available.Model SN SP F1 ACC AUROC AUPR ACEP 0.874 0.6107 0.767 0.7398 0.8101 0.7411 AMP-BERTsub 0.8941 0.6330 0.8049 0.7610 0.8445 0.7984 Note: The highest scores are highlighted in bold. Abbreviations: ACC, accuracy; AUPR, area under the precision-recall curve; AUROC, area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve; SN, sensitivity; SP, specificity. FIGURE 3 Prediction performance metrics for the external test dataset. Plain bars represent model performance on the entiredataset, and dashed bars represent model performance on the subset of test data that includes only the sequences with PSSM information available. ACC, accuracy; AMP, antimicrobialpeptides; AUROC, area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve; AUPR, area under the precision-recall curve; PSSM, position-specific scoring matrix; SN, sensitivity; SP, specificity.4o f1 3 LEE ET AL . at multiple angles. For visualization of attention scores, we chose scores whose values are greater than the inter-quartile range and drew Circos plots (Zhang et al., 2013 ) to illustrate their patterns across multiple heads of the most significant layer in AMP-BERT. In general, thetokenized residues attend to their close neighbors in shal- low layers, meaning self-attention is focused more on local relationships in such layers. In contrast, the resi-dues attend to more distant neighbors in deeper layers,demonstrating the fact that the residues focus their atten- tion on global relationships later on in the BERT module (Figure S1). Interestingly, the residues are able to capturethe actual structural dependencies between residues in the middle layers (Vig & Belinkov, 2019 ), as exhibited bythe subsequent attention visualizations of Layer 14 in Figure 4b,c. Another example of an AMP from the curated exter- nal test set with disulfide bridges is Leaf cyclotide 1, also known as vhl-1 (Index: DRAMP00875, UniProt ID:P84522). As suggested by its name, Leaf cyclotide 1 is a cyclic peptide found in an Australian plant called Viola hederaceae . It is involved in plant defense mechanisms, and has experimentally demonstrated anti-HIV activity(Chen et al., 2005 ) similar to Siamycin II. Leaf cyclotide 1's structure includes three disulfide bonds that are located in the protein core and helps stabilize its confor-mation along with the backbone. The attention visualiza- tion of multiple heads in Layer 15 showed that most FIGURE 4 Visualizations of attention patterns captured by AMP-BERT for DRAMP18350. (a) The mean entropy values for each attention head of each encoder layer: The diversity of values as shown by the gradients indicates that the model is able to analyze a sequencecomprehensively. Average values across all heads for each layer are calculated and represented separately at the top. (b) Accumulation of attention values for the most significant residues in layer 14. The residues with the largest attention values include cysteine. Each number following each token indicates the token's position in the original sequence. (c) Self-attention values for head 8 in layer 14. The attentionfrom neighboring residues of cysteine display the importance of cysteine residues in predicting the correct class label for our model. AMP, antimicrobial peptides; CLS, class token; SEP, separator token.LEE ET AL . 5o f1 3 residues throughout the sequence focus their attention on their closest neighboring cysteines, indicating theimportance of the bridge-forming residues once again (Figure 5). Notably, individual heads consist of different weights for each cysteine, which implies that each headattends to the cysteines distinctively. These examples of self-attention patterns in Layer 15 demonstrate the ability of our fine-tuned model to identify important structuralfeatures in general AMPs that contribute to their antimi- crobial activity. Beyond detecting the disulfide bonds in AMPs, AMP- BERT is able to recognize other structural features suchas alpha-helices and beta-strands. It is important tosuggest the candidates of structural information because it affects the efficacy of AMPs as antimicrobial agents(Koehbach & Craik, 2019 ). We found that some layers can capture such structural information in our external data samples by comparing the Circos plots of attentionscores with identified three-dimensional (3D) structures from PyMol (Schrodinger, 2015 ). For example, Head 8 of Layer 20 in AMP-BERT detected the known secondarystructure components of Antimicrobial peptide 1 from Echinochloa crus-galli (Barnyard grass), also known as EcAMP1 (Index: DRAMP00387, UniProt ID: P86698, 2L2R ) (Nolde et al., 2011 ; Rogozhin et al., 2012 ). EcAMP1 is the first example of disulfide-stabilized alpha-helical FIGURE 5 Visualizations of self-attention patterns captured by BERT layer 15 in AMP-BERT for DRAMP00875. (a) Head 2 (b) head 3 (c) head 6 (d) head 8. AMP, antimicrobial peptides; CLS, class token; SEP, separator token.6o f1 3 LEE ET AL . AMPs and its structure is similar to scorpion toxins and conopeptides (Nolde et al., 2011 ). Interestingly, the amino acids that comprise a hydrophobic core (Cys7, Arg8, Cys11, Met12, Pro19, Val22, Cys25, Val26, Cys29) attend to the alpha-helix related residues more than otherregions, demonstrating that the model focuses on the two alpha-helices of EcAMP1 (Figure 6a, b ). In addition, the identical layer and head detected the secondary structureregions in Defensin-like protein 1 from Triticum aestivum (Index: DRAMP00434, UniProt ID: P20158, PDB: 1GPS )(Colilla et al., 1990 ; Bruix et al., 1993 ). Gamma-1-pur- othionin, a synonym of Defensin-like protein 1, playsessential roles in plant immunity and reacts similarly to AMPs containing a triple-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet and one alpha-helix (Rogozhin et al., 2018 ). By analyzing the visualization of attention scores, we found that AMP- BERT catches the secondary structure regardless of whether a peptide consists of one type of structural fea-ture or a combination of multiple types (Figure 6c, d ). Our model also emphasized the secondary structures in FIGURE 6 Visualizations of self-attention patterns captured by layer 20 in AMP-BERT. Turquoise indicates the alpha-helix and indigo indicates the beta-strands. All three-dimensional (3D) structure figures were generated by PyMol. (a) Circos plot for the self-attention values of DRAMP00387 in head 8. The yellow-green area indicates the hydrophobic core of the AMP. (b) 3D structure of DRAMP00387 with secondary structures highlighted. (c) Circos plot for the self-attention values of DRAMP00434 in head 8. (d) 3D structure of DRAMP00434with secondary structures highlighted. AMP, antimicrobial peptides; CLS, class token; SEP, separator tokenLEE ET AL . 7o f1 3 AMPs regardless of the lengths of such features (Figure S2). Such analyses demonstrate that throughfine-tuning, AMP-BERT learned to find structural pat- terns of given peptides that contributed to its overall binary classification performance. 3|DISCUSSION We present AMP-BERT, a binary classification model for AMP prediction that achieves better prediction perfor-mance with unseen data than that of previously estab-lished state-of-the-art models, while utilizing the attention mechanism that suggests which peptide resi- dues are characteristic in AMPs and hence contributes toour model's decision-making process. Our deep learning- based model utilizes a BERT architecture that has been pre-trained with /C242.1 billion protein sequences to extract structural information from input peptides. The class- token embedding features, which encapsulate the overall structural characteristics of given sequences, are used tofine-tune AMP-BERT and make our per-sequence classi- fication model better suited for AMP prediction. These factors enable a higher prediction ACC than those of pre-vious methods; AMP-BERT was able to correctly predict76% of external test sequences that we curated for this research. In comparison, the best ACC achieved by com- parable models on the same test data was 74%. In addition to performance improvements, the atten- tion mechanism in AMP-BERT allows input sequences to be analyzed and interpreted in human-understandableterms, which is not possible for most other deep-learning AMP prediction methods. To the best of our knowledge, ACEP is the only other deep-learning-based model thatutilizes attention and attention scores; however, its archi-tecture can only handle 5-mers. AMP-BERT considers individual attention scores assigned to each residue, and this level of detail may be required to detect singleresidue-based patterns, such as disulfide bridges. There are several areas for additional model improve- ment to facilitate the AMP drug discovery process. Onedirection would be to account for different types of microbes and to design the model to make predictions for multi-label classes, such as antibacterial, antiviral, andantifungal proteins (Chung et al., 2020 ). Also, due to the lack of available structural information for AMP sequences, integration of features derived from higherstructural formation for training and in-depth analysis ofthe attention values obtained with attention-based models are currently limited. In addition, it would be impactful to design and develop the model to generate denovo peptide sequences with potential antimicrobial function(s); this approach for developing novel AMPs isexpected to have important implications in the drug dis- covery process. By thoroughly learning the structural andfunctional characteristics of AMPs with a generative deep learning model, it may be possible to computationally suggest new AMP candidates that can be further testedin vitro for experimental confirmation. 4|CONCLUSION In conclusion, our proposed model for AMP prediction demonstrated the value of deep-learning methods as apre-screening measure for AMP-based drug candidates, which in turn can accelerate the discovery process of antimicrobial drugs. Owing to its ability to be generalizedto unseen data and learn meaningful features of peptides that correspond to structure and function, AMP-BERT is expected to contribute to the development of novel anti-microbial drugs against which microbes cannot easily evolve resistance. As more AMPs are experimentally vali- dated and new structural information is uncovered, data-driven computational methods, such as our model, will become even more effective and contribute greatly to the field of AMP-based drug discovery. 5|MATERIALS AND METHODS 5.1 |Datasets The benchmark AMP dataset curated by Veltri et al., 2018 was used to fine –tune the pre-trained Prot- BERT classification model and produce our AMP-BERT model. This dataset included 1778 positive samples con-sisting of screened sequences from the APD3 database(version 3) (Wang et al., 2016 ) (Figure 7a) and 1778 nega- tive samples consisting of sequences from UniProt ( Uni- Prot Consortium, 2019 ) whose annotations included the keyword cytoplasm and excluded the keywords antimi- crobial, antibiotic, antiviral, antifungal, effector, and excreted (Figure 7b). B
=========================================
