【文献归属领域】: AMP 预测模型(SerpApi)
【文献标题】: LMPred: Predicting antimicrobial peptides using pre-trained language models and deep learning
【出版信息】: W Dee - Bioinformatics Advances, 2022 - academic.oup.com
【引用次数】: 58
【PDF 直链】: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformaticsadvances/article-pdf/2/1/vbac021/47086135/vbac021.pdf

【摘要】: … predicting AMPs. It would be interesting to note whether these performance trends are similar across AMPs with differing activities (ie anticancer compared to antihypertensive peptides). …

=========================================
【SerpApi PDF 全文/核心正文提取】:
Sequence analysis LMPred: predicting antimicrobial peptides using pre-trained language models and deep learning William Dee * Department of Bioinformatics, School of Biological and Behavioural Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, UK *To whom correspondence should be addressed. Associate Editor: Michael Gromiha Received on November 29, 2021; revised on March 1, 2022; editorial decision on March 24, 2022; accepted on March 29, 2022 Abstract Motivation: Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are increasingly being used in the development of new therapeutic drugs in areas such as cancer therapy and hypertension. Additionally, they are seen as an alternative to antibiotics due tothe increasing occurrence of bacterial resistance. Wet-laboratory experimental identiﬁcation, however, is both time- consuming and costly, so in silico models are now commonly used in order to screen new AMP candidates. Results: This paper proposes a novel approach for creating model inputs; using pre-trained language models to pro- duce contextualized embeddings, representing the amino acids within each peptide sequence, before a convolution-al neural network is trained as the classiﬁer. The results were validated on two datasets—one previously used inAMP prediction research, and a larger independent dataset created by this paper. Predictive accuracies of 93.33%and 88.26% were achieved, respectively, outperforming previous state-of-the-art classiﬁcation models. Availability and implementation: All codes are available and can be accessed here: https://github.com/williamdee1/ LMPred_AMP_Prediction . Contact: williamtimothydee@gmail.com Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics Advances online. 1 Introduction Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are a set of naturally occurring mol- ecules that exhibit a wide range of functions, including antibacterial,anticancer, antifungal and antihypertensive properties ( Bhadra et al., 2018 ). When used to create therapeutic drugs, peptides are in- creasingly showing efficacy in terms of treatment in a variety of im-portant areas; ranging from cancer targeting to eliminatingbacterial, viral and fungal pathogens ( Thundimadathil, 2012 ). Current cancer therapies, such as radiotherapy and chemo- therapy, often elicit harmful side-effects, and cancer cell resist-ance to chemotherapeutic agents is a large and growing issue(Rebucci and Michiels, 2013 ). Peptides have long been used as biomarkers in the detection and diagnosis of specific cancers,such as pancreatic, colorectal and lung ( Xiao et al. , 2013 ). However, recently their use has been extended, as they have beenshown to bind to specific cancerous sites and so have been used ascarriers for targeted drugs ( Wang et al. ,2 0 1 4 ). Certain peptides have also been shown to exhibit an inhibitory effect in cancerc e l l st h e m s e l v e s( Rayaprolu et al. ,2 0 1 3 ). Additionally, pathogenic bacteria are more frequently develop- ing multi-drug resistance ( Bhadra et al. , 2018 ;World Health Organization, 2014 ), rendering current antibiotic treatments inef- fective. Given that AMPs are endogenous, they have shown a lowerlikelihood for bacteria to develop resistance to them ( Boman, 2003 ), and so offer a complementary alternative to traditional drugs.Identification of natural AMPs is therefore becoming increasingly important. However, experimental identification isboth time-consuming and costly, hence the need for in silico pre- diction models ( Bhadra et al. ,2 0 1 8 ;Li and Wang, 2016 ). Previous model-based methods have utilized a range of Machine Learning approaches, including; Hidden Markov Models ( Fjell et al. ,2 0 0 7 ), Fuzzy K-Nearest Neighbour (FKNN; Xiao et al. , 2013 ), Random Forest (RF; Bhadra et al. ,2 0 1 8 ), Discriminant Analysis (DA; Thomas et al. ,2 0 1 0 ) and Support Vector Machines (SVM; Manavalan et al. ,2 0 1 7 ;Tyagi et al. ,2 0 1 3 ). Whilst these methods achieved high levels of accuracy, the fea- ture creation steps were often extensive, as they were reliant on gen-erating inputs that represented the biological composition of eachpeptide sequence. Bhadra et al. (2018) performed a survey of exist- ing approaches to summarize the common data pre-processing steps and found that prior research was most likely to use ‘compositional,physicochemical, structural properties, sequence order and the pat-tern of terminal residues’ in order to create the final feature set. In the case of Manavalan et al. (2017) , 436 additional features were engineered—20 representing amino acid composition, 400 relatingto dipeptide composition, 5 associated with atomic composition and11 referring to different physicochemical properties. Compositional metrics, like those described above, fail to take se- quence order into account—even though it is integral to the underlying function of peptides. To account for this, some prior approaches used Chou’s pseudo-amino acid composition (Pse AAC; Chou, 2001 ), VCThe Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. 1 This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by /4.0/), which permits unre- stricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Bioinformatics Advances , 2022, 1–7 https://doi.org/10.1093/bioadv/vbac021 Advance Access Publication Date: 31 March 2022 Original PaperDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bioinformaticsadvances/article/2/1/vbac021/6561563 by guest on 16 April 2026 generating correlation factors between each amino acid, which partly incorporated some relational information regarding sequence order(Meher et al., 2017 ;Xiao et al., 2013 ). Similarly, Evolutionary Feature Construction ( Kamath et al. 2014 ) has also been used to detect func- tional signals representing non-local, position-specific interactions at the nucleotide level ( Veltri et al.,2 0 1 7 ). Three recent papers have achieved improved model accuracies by applying Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques to cre-ate vectorized embeddings of the amino acid sequences as the soleinput features ( Suet al. , 2019 ;Veltri et al. , 2018 ;Wuet al. , 2019 ). This has the benefit of reducing the time taken, as well as the expert biological knowledge needed, when creating model inputs.Furthermore, NLP approaches have the potential to represent richerpositional information reflecting the specific locations of amino acids within a given sequence. Veltri et al. (2018) utilized the Bag of Words (BoW) method to initially assign a unique numerical token to each amino acid in a se- quence. This approach could recognize basic patterns, such as which amino acids are the same, and the frequency of specific amino acidsin a sequence or throughout the dataset. However, BoW fails to cap-ture component similarity. To partially alleviate this issue, an initial embedding layer was used in the neural network architecture, to convert the discrete vectors into a continuous and dense latent spacerepresented by a three number vector, which could then reflect morecomplex relationships between inputs. Suet al. (2019) built on this research by developing a multi-scale deep neural network (MS DNN), containing multiple convolutional layers, each using different filter lengths. This approach solely used an embedding layer to capture the semantic similarity betweenamino acids and found that long short-term memory (LSTM) layersdid not improve the predictive ability of their model. Furthermore, Suet al. (2019 ) found that creating a fusion model by combining their MS DNN with traditional compositional methods furtherimproved results. Lastly, Wuet al. (2019 ) used the Word2Vec Skip-Gram algo- rithm to create embeddings. This method learns by being given acentral word (or amino acid in this case) and then predicting themost likely words in a fixed window surrounding it, allowing it to reflect word similarity ( Mikolov et al. , 2013 ). One drawback of all these approaches, however, is that they fail to convey the complexcontextual information encoded by the position of each amino acid. In contrast, this paper proposes a novel method of creating embedding vectors—by utilizing language representation modelsthat have been pre-trained on large protein databases to producecontextualized embeddings. Language models (LMs) are built using the Transformer architecture ( Vaswani et al. , 2017 ) and have pri- marily been used for language-based tasks, given that they havebeen pre-trained on large corpora such as the 2500 million words found in Wikipedia ( Devlin et al. , 2019 ). They have been proven to outperform humans in some assessments, such as the StanfordQuestion Answering Dataset—a reading comprehension test(SQuAD 2.0, 2021 ), as well as the two NLP approaches previously mentioned. When these models are pre-trained on protein sequen- ces, treating each amino acid as a word, and the sequence as a sen-tence, they have shown an ability to generalize towardsunderstanding the ‘language of life’ itself, as Elnaggar et al. (2020 ) applied them to accurately predict both per-residue protein second- ary structure and per-protein subcellular localization. The LMs selected for this report are the auto-encoder models; Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT; Devlin et al. , 2019 ) and Text-To-Text Transfer Transformer (T5; Raffel et al. , 2020 ), and the auto-regressive model XLNet ( Yang et al. , 2020 ). These have already been pre-trained using the Summit supercomputer on either the UniRef100 or the UniRef50 datasets, consisting of 216 and 45 million protein sequences, respectively(Suzek et al. , 2015 ). The UniRef clusters are proteins sourced from the UniProt database, with the number referring to the similarity threshold set in the CD-HIT programme ( Huang et al. , 2010 ). Therefore, UniRef100 contains all UniProt sequences, whereasUniRef50 only contains sequences that do not share more than 50%identity. Additionally, BERT and T5 were also pre-trained on theBig Fat Database dataset, comprising 2122 million sequences (Steinegger and So ¨ding, 2018 ). All models were accessed via the ProtTrans Github page (https://github.com/agemagician/ProtTrans ). BERT aims to predict data from artificially corrupted inputs. It does this by adding [MASK] tokens during pre-training to replace a percentage of input words at random and it then aims to predict this masked word based on the surrounding context. In this manner, it is able to capture bi-directional context. However, all masked words are predicted in parallel and independently of one another, whichmeans that some of the overall context of a sentence can be lost dur- ing training. Also, whilst the artificial [MASK] tokens are used dur- ing pre-training, they are absent when the model is subsequently fine-tuned on a specific task, which can result in a ‘pretrain-finetune discrepancy’ ( Yang et al., 2020 ). XLNet is an auto-regressive model, which functions more simi- larly to a feed-forward neural network; these models aim to predictthe next word from a set of words, given the context. However, unlike auto-encoder models, the prediction is constrained to be uni- directional. XLNet partially overcomes this drawback throughpermutation language modelling, whereby the model maximizes the expected log-likelihood of the sequence when all possible permuta- tions of the sequence order are considered ( Yang et al. , 2020 ). By learning context from randomly ordered sentences the resulting model is in essence bi-directional without requiring masking.Furthermore, XLNet utilizes a memory mechanism introduced by a previous auto-regressive model—Transformer-XL ( Dai et al. , 2019 )—which allows for the processing of longer contextual segments of data than BERT. The T5 was introduced after Raffel et al. (2020) studied the current landscape of transfer learning techniques for NLP and found that, gen- erally, encoder–decoder models outperformed those only utilizing onehalf of the Transformer architecture. The T5 model therefore uses both parts of the Transformer, in contrast to BERT which only uses the en- coder, and XLNet which only uses the decoder. T5 was also trained ona new ‘Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus’, a comparatively clean and natural text dataset that was several magnitudes larger than many pre- vious training datasets. There is evidence that this additional complex- ity, and the fact that positional encodings for each attention head can be shared across all layers, gives T5 a performance advantage over theother two LMs ( Elnaggar et al., 2021 ). A convolutional neural network (CNN) has been chosen as the classifier based on its success in prior peptide prediction research (Veltri et al., 2018 ;Wuet al., 2019 ), as well as its successful applica- tion to other areas within bioinformatics, such as mapping protein sequences to folds ( Hou et al. , 2018 ) or the prediction of RNA sec- ondary structure ( Zhang et al. , 2019 ). The convolutional layers apply filters that can interpret the spatial and temporal dependencies between amino acids that have been represented by the contextual- ized LM embeddings. 2 Methods 2.1 Datasets Validation of the approach was performed on two datasets. Onewhich was sourced externally and has been used in prior AMP pre- diction research—referred to as the ‘Veltri Dataset’. The second has been constructed independently using publicly available resources—the ‘LMPred Dataset’. 2.2 Veltri dataset The Veltri dataset was sourced from the Antimicrobial PeptideScanner web page (https://www.dveltri.com/ascan/ ). This contains 1778 AMP and 1778 non-AMP samples and is split into the exact training, validation and test sets that Veltri et al. (2018) used to build and evaluate their model.2 W.DeeDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bioinformaticsadvances/article/2/1/vbac021/6561563 by guest on 16 April 2026 2.3 LMPred dataset The LMPred dataset has been built from a combination of external sources. The aim was to produce the largest and most up-to-dateAMP dataset possible. The positive samples (the AMPs) have been gathered from the free- ly available datasets shared by Veltri et al. (2018 )a n d Bhadra et al. (2018 ) and combined with the peer-reviewed, natural AMPs taken from the DRAMP 2.0 database ( Kang et al.,2 0 1 9 ). When duplicates were removed, these sources contributed 7053 AMPs. The samples are then filtered by removing AMPs <10 amino acids in length, as well as those sharing 90% sequence identity according to the CD-HIT online web server ( Huang et al. ,2 0 1 0 ). After filtering, the remaining 3758 AMPs were included in the LMPred dataset, being 24% more than the next largest collection used by Bhadra et al. (2018) . There is little incentive to experimentally prove a peptide is non- AMP, and thus there are no large repositories of peptides that have been shown to lack desirable activities. Therefore, without access toa formal non-AMP database, negative samples were collected simi- larly to prior research ( Veltri et al. , 2018 ;Xiao et al. , 2013 ). Sequences that had been reviewed and verified were downloadedfrom the UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/ ). The data were then filtered according to the following criteria: •Any duplicate entries were removed. •Only samples whose subcellular location was cited as ‘cyto- plasm’ were retained to ensure the origination was similar to the AMP samples. •Any samples labelled as speciﬁcally having the activities: ‘anti-microbial’, ‘antibiotic’, antiviral’, ‘antifungal’, ‘effector’ or ‘excreted’ were omitted. •Datapoints with fewer than 10 amino acids and more than 255amino acids were removed. The remaining samples then mirroredthe range of AMP sequence lengths in the positive sample dataset. •Sequences which contained unnatural amino acids (Z, B, J, O, Uor X) were removed. •Finally, sequences were screened for similarity using the CD-HITprogramme, using a 40% similarity threshold. The threshold canbe stricter for non-AMPs given the larger number of available sequences, and this ensures a more diverse dataset overall. Previous research found that if the negative sample sequence- length distribution matched that of the positive samples, this resulted in the highest classification accuracy models ( Veltri et al. , 2018 ). Therefore, 3758 non-AMPs were selected from the remaining pool of 33 722 to compile a final dataset that matched this criterion. The dataset was then split using sklearn’s ‘train_test_split’ function(https://scikit-learn.org/ ); 40% of the data were set aside for train- ing, 20% for validation and the remaining 40% for testing. The Supplementary Information includes the sequence-length distributions of the AMP and non-AMP samples within the LMPred dataset. The splitting of train, test and validation sets was performed on a stratified basis to retain a similar distribution across all data- sets. The data have been made freely available to download athttps://github.com/williamdee1/LMPred_AMP_Dataset . 2.4 LM embeddings Instructions were followed on the ProtTrans Github page for how to create word embeddings using each LM. An overview of this process is as follows: •Download the speciﬁc tokenizer and pre-trained LM hosted on the ProtTrans Rostlab server. •Convert the sequences of amino acids into a list and add spaces in between each amino acid. •Any unnatural amino acids (‘U, Z, O, B, J’) are mapped to ‘X’.•The sequence IDs are encoded in batches by the tokenizer, pad- ding with zeros to a speciﬁed max length so all inputs are the same length. •Torch tensors representing the input IDs and the mask used forthe attention mechanism are created. •The embeddings are generated in batches of 10 to ensure mem-ory constraints are not breached and the output is saved as anumpy array. Certain LMs produce special tokens, such as [CLS] or [SEP] tokens, that are included in the embedding array. The CLS token iscreated by some models to be used as an intelligent average one-di- mensional vector summarizing the full two-dimensional embedding. It is often used as the input for NLP classification tasks. The SEPtoken separates any special tokens from the embeddings. In this pro-ject, the full embeddings were used as not all LMs produce CLStokens and this ensures greater comparability across results.Additionally, using the full embeddings ensures valuable informa-tion is not lost and, instead, the neural network can decide how toscreen the data through the use of the filters, kernels and max-pool- ing layers. An example of a vectorized embedding produced by a pre- trained LM is shown in Figure 1 . 2.5 Model architecture A CNN was chosen as the classifier for this paper and was built using the Keras framework (https://keras.io/ ), which utilizes the Tensorflow ( Abadi et al., 2016 ) back-end. Two different architectures were tested for each LM, altering the number of convolutional, max pooling, dense and batch nor-malization layers to investigate the impact on performance. Thesearchitecture changes were not found to significantly impact results,with the maximum difference being a 1.47% change in accuracy for the T5 model pre-trained on the Big Fat Database. Full results can be found within the Supplementary Information . The architec- ture selected for the best-performing LM—T5 UniRef50—can befound in Figure 2 . 2.6 Hyperparameter tuning For each set of LM embeddings, tuning was performed independent- ly to ascertain the optimal hyperparameters for each resulting CNNmodel. The tuning was performed using the Keras Tuner (https://keras.io/keras_tuner ), which provides a framework to apply differ- ent search algorithms. Both the Hyperband ( Liet al. , 2016 ) and the Bayesian Optimization ( Snoek et al. , 2012 ) tuning algorithms were used. Utilizing the two methods in combination has been shown tooutperform using them separately as, ‘bandit-based approaches’(like Hyperband) ‘lack guidance’, whereas Bayesian optimizationacross the entire search space can be ‘computationally infeasible’(Falkner et al. , 2018 ). The tuning uses only the training and valid- ation partitions of the data. Tuning was performed for a maximum of 10 epochs for Hyperband, and 15 for Bayesian Optimization, with an early stop-ping call back after 6 epochs without a decrease in validation loss,and a reduction of the learning rate by a factor of 1e /C01after 4 epochs without a decrease. The optimal parameters were the ones, which produced the model with the lowest validation loss during training. 2.7 Model training and evaluation Once hyperparameters were selected for each LM-embedding ap-proach, each CNN model was trained for 30 epochs with the opti-mizer loss function set to ‘binary_crossentropy’ and metrics set to‘accuracy’. Early stopping was set to 12 epochs, and the learningrate was reduced by a factor of 1e /C01after 4 epochs without an im- provement in validation loss. The model checkpoint call back saved the model with the lowest validation loss during training.LMPred: predicting antimicrobial peptides 3Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bioinformaticsadvances/article/2/1/vbac021/6561563 by guest on 16 April 2026 In terms of evaluation, each model was tested for accuracy (Ac.) on the test set for both the Veltri and the LMPred datasets. Accuracy is considered the goal metric as identifying positive and negative samples correctly is equally important. Additionally, sensi-tivity (Sn.), specificity (Sp.), Matthew’s correlation coefficient (MCC) and the area under the ROC curve (AUC) were also calcu- lated to provide a full overview of model performance. These met- rics were calculated as follows using the number of true positive (TN), true negative (TN), false positive (FP) and false negative (FN)predictions: Sn:¼ TP TPþFN(1) Sp:¼TN TNþFP(2) Ac:¼TPþTN TPþTNþFPþFN(3) MCC ¼ðTP/C2TNÞ/C0ðFP/C2FNÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ ðTPþFPÞðTPþFNÞðTNþFPÞðTNþFNÞp :(4) The area under the ROC curve (AUC) was calculated using the sklearn metrics package.The results were compared to that of the available webserver models, produced by previous state-of-the-art AMP prediction papers, when provided the same test sets. These include; the CAMP server’s artificial neural network, support vector machine, discrimin-ant analysis and random forest models ( Thomas et al. , 2010 ), AmPEP’s random forest ( Bhadra et al. , 2018 ), iAMP-2L’s fuzzy K- nearest neighbour ( Xiao et al. , 2013 ), iAMPpred’s support vector machine ( Meher et al. , 2017 ) and Veltri’s CNN model ( Veltri et al. , 2018 ). 2.8 Replicating Veltri’s prior approach In order to ensure a robust comparison with Veltri et al. ’s (2018 ) method for AMP prediction, a replica of their CNN was constructed. Firstly, it was tested on the Veltri dataset, and its efficacy was compared to that of the original paper, to verify it had been replicated correctly. This approach was thentested on the LMPred test set, having been trained using the additional training and validation samples provided by that dataset, which the Veltri webserver model has not had access to. Lastly, since some positive samples in the LMPred dataset were sourced from the dataset used by Veltri et al. (2018 ), the webserver model will have been trained on 457 AMPs it is then a s k e dt op r e d i c t .M e t r i c sw i l lt h e r e f o r ea l s ob ei n c l u d e ds h o w - ing the efficacy of the Veltri webserver model at predicting only unseen data. Fig. 1. An example of how the sequence ‘MQLSAPHCKKL’ would be represented after applying a pre-trained LM to create an embedding vector Fig. 2. An illustration of the CNN architecture used in the best-performing LM embedding-based classiﬁer—T5 Uniprot 504 W.DeeDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/bioinformaticsadvances/article/2/1/vbac021/6561563 by guest on 16 April 2026 2.9 Technical settings Creating word embeddings, as well as hyperparameter tuning, train- ing and evaluation of the CNN models was performed using Google Colab Pro (https://research.google.com/colaboratory/ ). A Tesla P100-PCIE-16 GB GPU was used, as well as up to 24 GB of RAM and 150 GB of disk resources. Models using two convolutional layers (T5 UniRef50 and XLNet) took 107 s per epoch to train and 166 s to load and predict the 3007 test samples in the LMPred dataset. The size of those mod-els was /C241.16 GB. This is compared to 35 s per training epoch, 34 s for testing and 5.2 MB in size, for the models using one convolution- al layer (BERT UniRef100, BERT BFD and T5 UniRef100). 3 Results 3.1 Veltri dataset Table 1 shows the performance of the CNN models, using the differ- ent LM embeddings as inputs, when tested on the Veltri dataset. These results have been compared with the results published inVeltri et al. ’s (2018 ) AMP peptide prediction paper, as well as Su et al.’s (2019 ) multi-scale DNN and fusi
=========================================
