【文献归属领域】: AMP 预测模型(SerpApi)
【文献标题】: Protein language models and machine learning facilitate the identification of antimicrobial peptides
【出版信息】: D Medina-Ortiz, S Contreras, D Fernández… - International Journal of …, 2024 - mdpi.com
【引用次数】: 19
【PDF 直链】: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/europepmc/webservices/rest/PMC11487388/fullTextXML

【摘要】: … design by generating novel peptide sequences. Techniques such as variational autoencoders (VAE) and generative adversarial networks (GAN) … models regarding antimicrobial peptide …

=========================================
【替身猎手 PMC XML 全文无感提取】:
1. IntroductionPeptides are versatile, bioactive, short amino acid chains, with lengths of 5–15 amino acids and rarely exceeding 30 amino acids [1,2]. The diverse roles that they play in living organisms, e.g., acting as structural components, enzymatic inhibitors, hormones, host defense molecules, neurotransmitters, and cell surface receptors, have attracted great research interest due to their potential applicability in the biochemical and pharmaceutical industries [3,4,5,6]. Of particular interest, some peptides may possess antimicrobial properties, including antibacterial, antiviral, antifungal, and antiparasitic effects [7].The increasing number of peptides documented in the literature has provoked significant interest in applying computational biology techniques to analyze peptide sequences, predict biological activity, calculate physicochemical properties, and assist in peptide design [8,9]. Predictive models, including machine learning and deep learning architectures, have been developed for tasks such as antimicrobial and antiviral peptide classification [10,11,12,13,14,15]. Generative models have also been employed to aid therapeutic peptide design by generating novel peptide sequences. Techniques such as variational autoencoders (VAE) and generative adversarial networks (GAN) have shown promise in creating new antimicrobial peptides [12,16,17,18,19,20,21,22]. Recent advances in diffusion models have further enhanced the generative approaches for antimicrobial peptide design [23,24,25].This work implements AMP-Detector, a sequence-based functional classification model, to assist the discovery of potential antimicrobial peptides. This work implements 21 binary classification models to predict the functional biological activity of peptide sequences, including antimicrobial, antibacterial, and antiviral functions. The proposed pipeline for the training of these predictive models integrates numerical representation strategies, machine learning algorithm exploration, statistical approaches to select optimal combinations, Bayesian methods for hyperparameter tuning, and the criteria-based selection of the best models [26]. On average, the models achieved precision of over 83% and a Matthews correlation coefficient of 0.7 across the explored tasks. New peptides for all types of functional biological activity evaluated in this work were discovered using the trained models and the Peptide Atlas database [27]. Additionally, over 100,000 peptides were generated using variational autoencoder (VAE) approaches, and their functional biological activity was evaluated with the trained binary classification models, leading to the in silico discovery of more than 600,000 potential antimicrobial peptides, 200,000 antibacterial peptides, and 500,000 antiviral peptides. AMP-Detector incorporates an inference tool to facilitate the evaluation and exploration of unknown peptide sequences with potential antimicrobial peptides. Integrating trained classification models with generative approaches demonstrates the efficacy of the implemented methods in annotating and designing novel potential antimicrobial peptides, showing clear advantages over traditional computational biology approaches.2. Results and Discussion2.1. Main Features of the Studied DatasetsWe collected more than 100,000 peptide sequences with reported functional biological activity from Peptipedia [28] and applied a filter to remove all peptide sequences containing non-canonical residues, resulting in the selection of 86,477 peptides for the development of predictive models following the pipeline described in Figure 1. Tasks such as antimicrobial, antibacterial, antiviral, antiparasitic, antifungal, and antimammalian cell processes had more than 5000 positive examples. In contrast, after redundancy evaluation, the antimalarial and quorum-sensing tasks had less than 200 positive examples. The low number of examples in these tasks could negatively affect the performance of the trained models, as these datasets are typically categorized as Low-N datasets. Consequently, more sophisticated machine learning strategies, such as transfer learning or contrastive learning methods, are necessary to achieve optimal performance [29].For each task, besides encoding using the seven pre-trained models detailed in the table below, we included the one-hot encoding approach, eight physicochemical-based encoding methods, and eight Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)–physicochemical representations. Altogether, we considered 24 encoding techniques for each task. Methods like ProTrans ALBERT and one-hot encoding generate vectors with the highest dimensionality. In contrast, methods based on physicochemical properties and FFT aim to represent and characterize a function using a lower dimensionality space (See Section S4 of the Supplementary Materials for more details).2.2. Binary Classification TasksThe proposed pipeline, summarized in Figure 1, was utilized to train binary classification models for each of the 21 types of biological activity examined in this study. Over 15,000 models were successfully trained by exploring various numerical representation strategies, supervised learning algorithms, and hyperparameter configurations. Each combination was evaluated using classic metrics such as precision and recall. Subsequently, statistical criteria were applied to identify the optimal numerical representation strategy and supervised learning algorithms, followed by a detailed hyperparameter tuning process. The performance was then assessed using an independent test dataset, allowing for the selection of models with the highest performance and the lowest overfitting rate. This section summarizes the statistical analysis conducted during the exploration stage, the chosen combinations for the hyperparameter tuning process, and the tuned models generated for each biological task. Additionally, a benchmark analysis of the most common biological activity types evaluated in this study is included to demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed methodology.2.2.1. Performance StatisticsOur model training and validation pipeline outputs several performance metrics used for model selection. The training performance reports the mean over several k-cross-validations in 80% of the dataset, while the validation performance is a single value obtained when applying the generated model on the 20% remaining. As the 80:20 partition is repeated 30 times and the results are aggregated over different categories, we obtain distributions instead of single performance values.Models trained on datasets encoded using embedding representations perform better than models trained on datasets encoded using one-hot encoders, physicochemical-based encoders, and FFT-based encoder strategies. The embedding representation achieves mean precision of 77% during training and testing. In contrast, while physicochemical-based and one-hot-based encoders present similar average precision (75%), they exhibit more outliers and erratic behavior in distribution. FFT-based encoders show the lowest mean precision (67%) but do include positive outliers (see Figure 2A). Regarding algorithms, ensemble-based methods like Random Forest and ExtraTrees achieve the highest mean precision at 77%. In contrast, methods like decision trees and nearest neighbors obtain lower performance, with precision values below 70% (see Figure 2B).Given that the performance distribution for models using embedding-based representations achieved, on average, the highest performance, we extended the evaluation to include supervised learning algorithms and embedding representations. Generally, models based on ProTrans T5 Uniref, ProTrans T5 xlu50, and Esm1B achieve the highest performance across all evaluated metrics. However, except for ProTrans t5 BERT, there are no significant differences in the average performance of each pre-trained model used in this work (see Figure 2C). Additionally, the performance distribution by algorithm shows that ensemble-based models remain the best-performing supervised learning algorithms compared to decision tree or K-nearest neighbors approaches (KNN) (see Figure 2D).When evaluating the performance by activity, on average, the trained models for anti-Gram(+), antimammalian cell, anuran defence, anti-inflammatory, and cell–cell communication tasks show the highest average precision, with values above 78%. These tasks also exhibit the highest sensitivity (greater than 0.77) and MCC performance (greater than 0.55). In contrast, antiangiogenic, blood–brain barrier penetration, and antioxidative peptide identification exhibit the lowest average precision, with values below 67% (see Figure 2E).2.2.2. Optimizing the Hyperparameters of Selected ModelsUpon completing the exploration stage and selecting the best-performing models, we obtained 87 combinations of supervised learning algorithms and numerical representation strategies, which were chosen for the hyperparameter optimization process. The most commonly selected combinations were ProTrans xlu50 with ExtraTrees (8.7% of selected combinations), ProTrans T5 Uniref with ExtraTrees (8.7%), and Esm1B with ExtraTrees (7.8%). Less frequently selected combinations, such as ProTrans T5BDF with Random Forest or Histogram-Based Gradient Boosting, represented only 0.87% of the selections. Combinations like ProTrans ALBERT with Hist Gradient Boosting or XGBoost and ProTrans BERT with all supervised learning algorithms except ExtraTrees did not achieve the cutoff performance and thus were not observed among the selected sample.We followed a Bayesian approach to determine the optimal set of hyperparameters for the 87 selected combinations of models, evaluating 50 trials per combination, with a specific random state (random state = 42) applied to all evaluations. The performance estimation followed the same procedure as in the exploration stage. An independent dataset was also used to assess the models’ performance with tuned hyperparameters and to compare all evaluated methods. Tasks like antifungal, antiviral, and anti-inflammatory had more than seven possible combinations explored, while models for cell-penetrating, antimammalian cell, and blood–brain barrier penetration properties considered only one combination (see Section S5 of the Supplementary Materials for more details).Using the evaluation criteria proposed in this study, the best classification models were selected with the highest performance, the lowest overfitting during training, and the smallest differences between the validation and testing performance. Table 1 summarizes the performance of the selected models for each task, covering the training, validation, and testing stages. Classification models for anuran defense, quorum sensing, antibacterial activity, cell–cell communication, and antimammalian cell activity achieved precision values exceeding 90% across the training, validation, and testing stages. Only the models for antiviral and antimalarial tasks achieved performance below 80% in the testing stage. The remaining activity types maintained precision values over 80%. Hyperparameter tuning improved the testing performance in 13 out of 21 cases. In five cases, the performance remained consistent with the validation and training phases, and, in three cases—antimalarial, antiviral, and antidiabetic—the performance slightly decreased. Despite these reductions, the lowest precision value was 78%, demonstrating the proposed methodology’s robust capabilities to generalize the training of functional classification models.Analyzing the recall or sensitivity performance of the models, those with the highest precision also reported the highest recall values, achieving sensitivity scores above 0.9. In contrast, the blood–brain-barrier-penetrating, antiviral, and antimalarial classification models had the lowest recall values, with a sensitivity score of 0.78 (see Section S6 of the Supplementary Materials for more details).The 21 highest-performing models were employed to develop AMP-Detector, a Python library designed to enhance the usability of trained models by facilitating the inference of biological activity for peptide sequences. AMP-Detector integrates both the trained and pre-trained models for embedding representation, streamlining the execution of all steps in the pipeline.An exploration of four deep learning architectures was conducted to compare the performance of the proposed models with predictive models trained using neural network approaches. The explored architectures included a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), Bi-Long Short-Term Memory (Bi-LSTM), the Bi-Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), and a combination of the CNN and LSTM architectures (see Section S8 of the Supplementary Materials for more details). All tasks were evaluated using the selected embedding representation and the same datasets for training, validation, and testing.We calculated the model performance for each of the architectures considered during both the validation and testing stages. Deep learning architectures generally showed higher performance than the proposed pipeline during validation. However, during testing with the independent dataset, the deep learning models exhibited lower performance in most cases compared to the implemented models using AMP-Detector. This discrepancy between the validation and testing performance suggests an overfitting problem with the deep learning models.In specific cases, such as antimicrobial, cell–cell communication, cell-penetrating, and antiviral tasks, CNN-based methods demonstrated higher performance than the approaches proposed in this work. However, these differences were not systematic or substantial.Despite deep learning’s promising results, the further exploration of different architectures, hyperparameters, configuration strategies, and embedding representation evaluations is necessary to fully realize its potential. This is particularly important in separating antiviral peptides or peptides with communication and transmission properties. Moreover, applying transfer learning and fine-tuning approaches appears to be a promising alternative in addressing the challenges associated with low-N datasets. Future work should focus on these methods to enhance the model performance and generalization for properties like drug delivery, quorum sensing, and anti-aging peptide identification.2.2.3. Benchmark AnalysisThis work explores various tools, methods, and strategies previously reported in the literature to facilitate a comparison of their performance with the trained models using the implemented pipeline and available on AMP-Detector.First, we performed a literature survey to identify state-of-the-art sequence-based approaches for the prediction of the functional biological activity of peptide sequences. The search included methods with web servers, available models, or strategies for the training of classification models based on requirements outlined in public repositories and the available datasets. Subsequently, all collected tools were evaluated and tested, excluding those that were inaccessible (non-functional servers), lacked the necessary datasets, did not have auxiliary tools for numerical representation, or could not be replicated locally.Using the collected tools, a benchmark analysis was performed on the benchmark dataset (the 10% of the input data that was excluded from the model development stage), assessing more than 15 tools previously reported in the literature. This analysis focused on commonly reported biological activity types, such as antimicrobial, antibacterial, and antiviral classifications. The sensitivity and specificity (see Section S1 of the Supplementary Materials) were calculated to evaluate and compare the performance of the explored tools and the trained models.The results are summarized in Table 2. The trained model using the proposed pipeline in this work achieved the highest sensitivity and specificity for the antimicrobial task. The DBAASP klebsiella method achieved the highest sensitivity but had random specificity for antibacterial classification. DBAASP approaches depend on the types of organisms used to evaluate or detect antibacterial peptides, with methods like DBAASP staphylococcus showing sensitivity lower than 0.9, decreasing by more than 0.05 points. Tools like TPpred-LE [30] exhibited the highest sensitivity for antifungal, antiparasitic, and antiviral agents but generally had low specificity.In summary, the models available in AMP-Detector achieved the highest specificity across all evaluated tasks, particularly excelling in antimicrobial identification. They also showed competitive performance in other tasks. The high specificity of the trained models facilitates their use in therapeutic peptide discovery, allowing for the effective elimination of peptides without desirable activity and increasing the likelihood of detecting peptides with the desired activity.2.3. Case Study: Antimicrobial Peptide Discovery and De Novo Peptide GenerationHere, we used AMP-Detector to discover and generate potential antimicrobial peptides. First, we extracted and applied our models on over 3.6 million peptides with unknown activity from the Peptide Atlas database [27]. We identified over 300,000 peptides with potential antimicrobial activity and 400,000 others with potential antibacterial and antifungal activity (see Table 3). We found that more than 30% of the peptides analyzed exhibited potential activity in antiviral, antidiabetic, blood–brain-barrier-penetrating, anti-inflammatory, quorum-sensing, and neuropeptide functions. This high prevalence of potential activity among the peptides analyzed is somewhat unusual and might be due to the high rate of false positives. To further explore the likelihood of these findings, we analyzed the distribution of the physicochemical properties using the modlAMP v4.3.0 tool [41] and how these differed among the datasets studied and generated. No differences were observed between the raw data and the peptides from the Peptide Atlas (see Figure 3), meaning that the activity identified was indeed feasible.As a second example, we incorporated the models here developed with generative learning techniques for de novo peptide design. We explored two approaches: (i) emulating transfer learning strategies using a pre-trained model to generate metalloproteins [42] and (ii) training a generative model based on VAE architectures following the method proposed by [43]. Two scenarios were examined for the pre-trained model approach: (i) generating new sequences from peptides with reported antimicrobial activity in the literature and (ii) applying the same methodology to peptides without reported antimicrobial activity. Table 3 summarizes the peptides identified with the desired activity. In both scenarios, 100,000 peptides were generated and evaluated using the predictive models developed in this study. Table 3 shows no significant differences observed in the peptides identified for each activity type based on the input used. However, more peptides were consistently identified when using peptides with reported antimicrobial activity as input for de novo peptide generation. The physicochemical properties, such as the isoelectric point and hydrophobic radius, exhibited subtle differences in their distributions across the generated peptides (cf. Figure 3).We used our generative model to create 1000 new peptide sequences, but 355 were not unique and were discarded. Out of the remaining 645, we identified 640 with potential antimicrobial activity. This outcome aligns with the model’s training stage, which utilized antimicrobial peptide sequences to learn about amino acid frequencies and relationships, and is also reflected in the relative frequency of their constitutive amino acids (Figure 4A). Subsequent classification revealed that over 500 of these peptides could have antifungal and antiparasitic properties, while more than 300 may possess antibacterial and antimalarial properties.To further explore the relationship between the physicochemical properties and models in the discovered sequences, we studied their distributions in different datasets. We randomly selected 600 peptides from each strategy and dataset, distinguishing between peptides registered in the Peptide Atlas, those generated using the VAE pre-trained models and our VAE model, and the raw AMP peptides. We used the modlAMP tool to estimate nine physicochemical properties of these sequences (cf. Figure 3 regarding how these properties are distributed among the datasets and Section S10 of the Supplementary Materials for more details). Our findings showed that the sequences generated using our VAE model had a higher molecular weight than those in other datasets, but no substantial differences in other properties were observed. This indicates that the generated models are stable and produce sequences that are consistent with those already reported.Compared to other analyzed strategies, the differences observed in the peptides with potential antimicrobial activity, which were generated using the trained VAE, can be attributed to the trends in the residues present in the generated sequences. For instance, the higher occurrence of hydrophobic residues such as leucine and methionine in the peptide sequences indicates their increased hydrophobicity (see Figure 4A). Additionally, the lower frequency of charged residues affects properties like the charge density and isoelectric point.3. Materials and Methods3.1. Data Collection and PreprocessingWe obtained peptide sequences from the Peptipedia v2.0 [28], including only those with biological activity reported in the literature. Filters based on the target biological activity were implemented to collect positive examples. These positive examples included antimicrobial, antibacterial, antiviral, antifungal, antiparasitic, anuran defense, antiprotozoal, antiangiogenic, antidiabetes, antibacterial Gram(+) and Gram(−), anti-inflammatory, antimalarial, antimammalian cell, antioxidative, blood–brain-barrier-penetrating, cell–cell communication, cell-penetrating, drug delivery vehicles, neuropeptides, and quorum sensing, among others. For each dataset, negative examples were collected using peptide sequences in Peptipedia v2.0 with reported biological activity differing from the positive instances [28]. For example, all peptides without antimicrobial effects were used to generate negative examples for the antimicrobial dataset.Using a binary dataset as input, the examples were divided by category (positive or negative). Then, the CD-Hit v4.8.1 tool [44] was applied to remove redundancies in each category using a homology percentage of 90% and the rest of the configuration parameters by default [33]. Finally, the representative sequences were employed to rebuild the binary classification dataset. We addressed the class imbalance undersampling issue by randomly selecting subsets of the negative class, as it was substantially larger than the positive class in all datasets.3.2. Encoding Peptide SequencesEncoding, i.e., the numerical representation of the peptide sequences, is one critical task when developing predictive models in protein science. Here, we explored different pre-trained models (summarized in Table 4). The bio-embedding [45] tool was used to apply the pre-trained models and generate the embeddings, combined with its reduced dimensionality method. We also explored classic numerical representation strategies, including one-hot encoding [46], physicochemical coding [47], and Fast Fourier Transform approaches [48], to evaluate the performance of the machine learning algorithms using different numerical representation strategies.3.3. Training and Validating Classification ModelsThe classification models developed in this work were built based on a classic pipeline used to train predictive models using machine learning approaches [50]. Figure 1 summarizes this work’s proposed method for the training of sequence-based predictive models.First, the dataset is encoded as described in the previous section. Subsequently, each encoded dataset is split into two datasets in a 90:10 ratio. The first dataset is used for model development and the second for independent testing and benchmarking (see Figure 1A).The model development dataset is divided into training and validation datasets using an 80:20 ratio. Within this stage, we develop models using diverse supervised learning algorithms and hyperparameters. The supervised learning algorithms explored in this work include tree-based algorithms like decision trees; ensemble-based methods like ExtraTrees, Hist Gradient Boosting, XGBoost, and Random Forest; distance-based algorithms like K-Nearest Neighbors; and kernel-based methods like Support Vector Machine. Each model is evaluated using classic performance metrics such as precision, reca
=========================================
