HPLC-grade water, acetonitrile, and methanol (Optima) were from Thermo Fisher. Metabolite standards and all media components were from Sigma-Aldrich. U-13C-Glucose (99%) and 15N-(NH4)2SO4 and 15N-NH4Cl were from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories. HPLC-grade water, acetonitrile, and methanol (Optima) were from Thermo Fisher. Metabolite standards and all media components were from Sigma-Aldrich. U-13C-Glucose (99%) and 15N-(NH4)2SO4 and 15N-NH4Cl were from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories. S. cerevisiae strain FY4 was grown at 30 °C in YNB without amino acids (Difco 291940) and 2% glucose. Labeling was carried out for > 10 generations. Cells were harvested in exponential phase (OD600 of 0.45) by filtering onto a 50 mm nylon membrane filter (Millipore), which was immediately transferred into −20°C extraction solvent (1.3 mL 40:40:20, acetonitrile:methanol:water with 0.5% formic acid) in a Petri dish. The dish was kept at −20°C for 3 min. Then 108 uL 15% NH4HCO3 was added to neutralize the samples30. The final solution was kept at −20 °C for 15 min and the resulting mixture was transferred into an Eppendorf tube and spun down at 16,000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was taken for LC-MS analysis. E. coli strain NCM3722 was handled as S. cerevisiae, except growth temperature was 37 °C, media was Gutnick minimal media containing 0.4% glucose and 10 mM NH4Cl31, and OD was measured at 650 nm. A procedure blank was generated identically with water replacing the cell culture. Liver extracts were generated from 20 mg flash frozen mouse liver, which was weighed and ground with a cryomill (Retsch) at 25 Hz for 30 s and extracted as above. LC used a Vanquish UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) and Xbridge BEH Amide HILIC column (Waters) with 25 min gradient from acetonitrile to pH 9.5 aqueous buffer. Injected sample volume was 5 μL. LC was coupled by electrospray ionization (±3.3 kV) to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Raw LC/MS data were converted to mzXML format using the command line “msconvert” utility.32 Peak extraction of the raw data for cells growing in unlabeled media was performed using the ElMaven software package (https://elucidatainc.github.io/ElMaven). For details, see Supplementary Methods. The significance of peak intensity changes upon application of in-source CID was assessed by t-test. Peaks were annotated as fragments if they showed a significant signal increase (p < 0.05) at either 2 eV or 4 eV. The code for PAVE is written with Matlab R2017b package. It is available at http://github.com/xxing9703/PAVE. LC used a Vanquish UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher) and Xbridge BEH Amide HILIC column (Waters) with 25 min gradient from acetonitrile to pH 9.5 aqueous buffer. Injected sample volume was 5 μL. LC was coupled by electrospray ionization (±3.3 kV) to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Raw LC/MS data were converted to mzXML format using the command line “msconvert” utility.32 Peak extraction of the raw data for cells growing in unlabeled media was performed using the ElMaven software package (https://elucidatainc.github.io/ElMaven). For details, see Supplementary Methods. The significance of peak intensity changes upon application of in-source CID was assessed by t-test. Peaks were annotated as fragments if they showed a significant signal increase (p < 0.05) at either 2 eV or 4 eV. The code for PAVE is written with Matlab R2017b package. It is available at http://github.com/xxing9703/PAVE. Our approach to annotate untargeted LC-MS data begins with growing cells in four different isotopic conditions: unlabeled, 13C, 15N, and 15C+13N (Figure 1). Mass shifts across these four conditions are used by an algorithm called ATOMCOUNT to identify biological peaks and their carbon and nitrogen atom counts. The biological peaks are then subjected to thorough de-adducting and de-isotoping by an algorithm called JUNKREMOVER. This algorithm identifies adducts and isotopic variants by relating them to their co-eluting metabolite ions ([M-H]- or [M+H]+), which may appear in the same ionization mode or (less commonly) only in the opposite ionization mode. Adducts have the same labeling patterns as their metabolite peak, facilitating accurate annotation. JUNKREMOVER also filters out peaks whose C counts are too low for the observed mass and ringing peaks which occur on both sides of intense ion peaks in orbitrap data. The remaining peaks are divided into fragment versus metabolite ions, based on the intensity of fragments increasing under a mild in-source CID voltage, whereas the intensity of the corresponding metabolite peaks decline. The resulting substantially verified metabolite peaks are assigned formulae based on their m/z and C/ N atom counts, and associated with known metabolites based on RT and/or MS/MS match. To implement this approach, S. cerevisiae strain FY4 and E. coli strain NCM3722 were each grown in minimal essential glucose-ammonia media in four different isotopic conditions: unlabeled, 15N, 13C, and 15C+13N (Table 1) and harvested in exponential phase. Triplicate biological samples for each condition were analyzed by untargeted HILIC LC-MS using an amide column and high-resolution full-scan MS1 analysis on a Q-Exactive instrument, with ~15,000 peaks detected in negative mode and ~30,000 peaks in positive mode. The core concept of ATOMCOUNT is that, if peak i of m/z Mi in the unlabeled sample is of biological origin, it should show a characteristic mass shift across labeled conditions. Moreover, the corresponding peaks (Mi +Ni, Mi +Ci, Mi +Ni+Ci) in the labeled samples should match the intensity of peak i in the unlabeled sample. For each peak i in the unlabeled sample, ATOMCOUNT records, from the raw data of the labeled samples at the unlabeled peak’s RT (± 20 s; chromatographic shifts of < 20 s accordingly do not impact the procedure), the highest signal intensity for masses (± 10 ppm) corresponding to every integer combination of Ni and Ci with Ni = {0, 1, 2, ..., Nmax} and Ci = {1, 2, ..., Cmax} with Nmax arbitrarily chosen to be 10 and Cmax the highest possible number of carbon atoms given the mass. For each combination of Ci and Ni, it computes the Pearson correlation (ρ) between the observed and expected intensity pattern (Figure 2). In cases where no values of Ni and Ci yield ρ > 0.75, the peak is discarded. In cases where multiple values of Ni and Ci yield ρ > 0.75, those yielding the highest value for ρ are accepted. An algorithmic advantage of ATOMCOUNT is retrieving the peaks in labeled samples, at the relevant masses and RT, directly from the raw data. This contrasts with prior approaches that compare list of picked peaks across the unlabeled and labeled samples. Directly querying the raw data avoids false negatives due to imperfect peak picking33. ATOMCOUNT identified less than 20% of peaks as having a logical labeling pattern (i.e. being biological peaks) (Table 2). Thus, a primary driver of the very large number “unknown” metabolites in many prior estimates is miscounting of environmental contaminants (i.e. chemicals not made by the microorganism, but instead found in water, tubes, etc.). Consistent with most of the discarded peaks being environmental contaminants, we observed ~ 80% of the discarded peaks in procedure blanks at intensities > 50% of that observed in the cellular samples. In contrast, only 10% of peaks retained by ATOMCOUNT were found at this level in the blank. Simple blank substrate, however, cannot substitute for the ATOMCOUNT procedure: even excluding peaks found in the blank, there are a roughly equal number of peaks that labeled and do not label. Moreover, ATOMCOUNT effectively annotates biological peaks with a C and N atom count that facilitates subsequent data analysis. In addition to the metabolite peaks ([M-H]- or [M+H]+), the list of biological peaks generated by ATOMCOUNT includes adducts, natural isotopic variants, and fragments. JUNKREMOVER systematically evaluates every peak returned by ATOMCOUNT and discards adducts and isotopic variants. As is typical13, this process begins with a pre-determined list of relevant adducts and isotopic variants and their associated mass deviations (D) from the metabolite ion. The list of adducts was initially obtained by literature search34 and was augmented by examination of our data, looking for common mass shifts among co-eluting peaks that could reasonably be explained by some form of adduct formation. With these lists in hand (Table S5 and S6), for each biological peak i in the unlabeled sample, JUNKREMOVER records from the raw data of the unlabeled samples (in both ionization modes), at the relevant RT, the peak intensity at Mi – D (one-by-one, for every candidate adduct and isotopic variant in this list, correcting by the mass of 2H when checking in the opposite mode). For de-adducting, the peak i is discarded if (i) the peak intensity at Mi – D is at least 20% of that at Mi, (ii) the peak at Mi – D passes the ATOMCOUNT criteria for a biological metabolite, and (iii) the C/N counts of the two peaks are equivalent. The value of 20% was based on our finding that, for known metabolites, either the [M+H]+ or [M+H]- peak is reliably at least 20% of the size of the largest adduct peak. Note that C and N atoms introduced by adduct formation, e.g. from formate or ammonia in the running buffer, are not of biological origin and therefore do not affect the C/N counts returned by ATOMCOUNT. As an example of the utility of labeling data for de-adducting, glucose gives rises to peaks at m/z 119.0349 [M-H-C2H4O2]-, 179.0560 [M-H]-, and m/z 239.0772 [M-H+C2H4O2]- in negative mode (Figure 3 A). The labeling data make clear that m/z 239.0772 is an adduct (as it matches the carbon count of m/z 179.0560) while m/z 119.0349 is a fragment (as it has two fewer carbons). As an example of the value of combined positive and negative mode analysis, the [M+Na]+ peak of glucose (Figure 3 B) was detected in positive mode and correctly recognized as an adduct by comparing to the [M-H]- peak in negative mode, despite the glucose [M+H]+ peak not being detectable. Overall, we observed more than 150 adducts whose proper assignment required comparison to metabolite peaks in the opposite polarity mode (Table 2). For candidate isotopic variants, the approach is identical to that for adducts, except that there is no requirement for 13C and 15N natural isotopic variants to match C/N counts, and for 18O and 34S, the peak intensity at mass i – D is required to be substantially greater than at mass i (20 times larger for 18O and 5 for 34S). To focus only on [M+H]+ and [M-H]- peaks, we also annotated doubly charged ions, which are relatively common in positive mode (Table 2). Similarly, we annotated homodimers (i) by searching for a peak at mass (i - 1)/2 (in negative mode) or (i + 1)/2 (in positive mode), where the C/N counts differ by exactly a factor of two. Collectively, these above steps in JUNKREMOVER annotate roughly 60% of the peaks found by ATOMCOUNT. Manual examination revealed that many of the remaining peaks had a surprisingly low C/N atom counts relative to the mass. We believe that these peaks with inappropriately low C/N count arise, at least in part, due to ions that are some combination of contaminants (such as solvent or plastic impurities) with an endogenous metabolite. This blending may occur during sample preparation (i.e. due to formation of covalent condensation products) or in the ESI source (i.e. due to adduct formation). To filter out such peaks, we eliminated those whose mass exceeded (i) the 99th percentile mass of unique endogenous metabolite molecular formulae in the HMBD database35 for that C count ± 2, and (ii) the cut-off for any lesser value of C. Especially in positive ion mode in S. cerevisiae, we observed many peaks exceeding this threshold (Figure 3 C, D). The number of peaks removed in this analysis depends on the percentile cutoff, which is a user parameter in JUNKREMOVER. The 99th percentile cutoff likely retains some peaks that are artifacts, while losing ~ 1% of real metabolite peaks. Using a 95th percentile cutoff would remove roughly an additional 20% of peaks (Table S4). In addition to the low C/N atom count peaks, we also observed ringing peaks which are a known artifact of Fourier transform-MS instruments including orbitraps. The ringing peaks occur in mass spectra symmetrically around high intensity peaks, shifted in mass by roughly ± 500 ppm (Figure S6A). The mass shift and relative intensity of ringing peaks is independent of MS resolution and ionization polarity (Figure S6B and C). To annotate ringing peaks, for each peak, we check if there is a larger peak at the same RT whose intensity is at least 100x higher and occurs within ±500 ppm; if so, the smaller peak is annotated as a ringing peak. Based on this analysis, about 2,000 of the initial peaks are ringing artifacts. While most of these were too noisy to be selected by ATOMCOUNT, 93 advanced into and were removed by JUNKREMOVER. After peak scrubbing by JUNKREMOVER, we obtained a peak list comprised substantially of metabolites and in-source fragments. The chemistry of fragmentation is more complicated than adduct formation. While certain fragmentation events are common (e.g. loss of water, ammonia), others are not easily predicted. Moreover, whereas adduct formation retains the C and N atom counts from labeling data, fragmentation does not except in certain situations such as loss of water. This makes comprehensive assignment of fragmentation events based solely on computational analysis of untargeted LC-MS data difficult.36,37 Accordingly, we sought a straightforward experimental approach to differentiate fragments from their parent ions. We reasoned that the application of a weak in-source CID voltage should increase signal intensity for fragments while decreasing it for of parent ions. Taking glucose as an example, two fragment ions (m/z 119.0349, m/z 101.0245) were observed at the retention time of glucose, corresponding to loss of C2H4O2 and C2H6O3. The intensity of both fragments increased with 2 eV and 4 eV in-source CID energy, while the intensity of the glucose parent ion at m/z 179.0560 and its adducts decreased. Higher energies resulted in further fragmentation from m/z 119.0349 to m/z 101.0245, which decreased signal intensity at m/z 119.0349, highlighting the importance of using low CID voltages. To test the general effectiveness of this approach, we examined how the intensities of metabolite ions and their fragments change in response to increasing in-source CID energies using 80 metabolite standards dissolved in extraction buffer (for individual compound data, see Table S9). Strikingly, each fragment ion increased at least somewhat at both 2 and 4 eV in-source CID energy, while every parent ion decreased (Figure 4). For 75 of the 80 known fragments, the increase was statistically significant at 4 eV (p < 0.05, t-test). This pattern held both for small robust compounds like malate and relatively labile-energy compounds like ATP. In-source CID is a built-in capacity in Thermo’s Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer. For other mass spectrometers, approaches such as all ion fragmentation can be used, and we verified that this approach works on Agilent’s 6550 Q-TOF, with the basic trend of metabolite signals decreasing and fragment signals increasing robust across a range of collision energies (Figure S8). The success of the in-source fragmentation approach depends on chromatographic resolution. For example, malate fragments to make an ion that mimics fumarate. Because malate and fumarate were chromatographically resolved38, we correctly annotated both the fragmentation event (at the retention time of malate, 12.9 min) and the genuine fumarate metabolite peak (at 11.6 min). At the same time, because we did not effectively separate linoleic and arachidonic acid from larger lipids, we discarded their peaks, because their abundances rose upon application of the CID voltage due to fragmentation of the co-eluting lipids. In ongoing work, we have also noted cases where the peak at [M+H]+ or [M-H]- rises in response to weak CID voltage due to an adduct peak breaking down to yield the (de)protonation peak. This seems only to be a problem, however, when the adduct peak is much more abundant than the (de)protonation peak, in which case the metabolite is better measured in the opposite polarity mode. Thus, despite some complexities, the weak in-source CID procedure is effective for distinguishing metabolite from fragment peaks. We accordingly applied this procedure to all peaks that were not rejected by the JUNKREMOVER algorithm (Table 2). This procedure annotated ~200 fragments in S. cerevisiae and ~150 in E. coli, leaving a set of total ~1500 peaks in S. cerevisiae and ~600 peaks in E. coli. The first step in metabolite identification from high resolution mass spectrometry data is chemical formula assignment. Owing to the rapid expansion of the number of possible atomic compositions with increasing masses, even with ± 2 ppm mass accuracy, m/z alone is typically insufficient for chemical formula assignment.15,39 For the list of metabolite peaks, we searched for matches to their m/z and C/N atom counts in a diversity of metabolite databases (Metlin40, Lipidmaps41, HMDB35, YMDB42 and ECMDB43). Take m/z 171.006 as an example: at 5 ppm accuracy, there are three candidate formulae: C3H9O6P, C6H8N2S2, C5H4N2O5, but only one of these matches the observed C count of 3 and N count of 0 (Figure S7). Another example is m/z 310.1634. Two formulae, C12H21N7O3 (m/z=310.1633) and C20H25NS (m/z=310.1635), give the same mass error (< 0.5 ppm), but are distinguished by C/N count. Overall, we obtained a database formula match based on m/z and C/N count for 663 peaks, about 30% of metabolite ions. There was a strong enrichment for peaks with formula match among the more intense peaks, whereas the smaller peaks were enriched for unknowns (Figure 5 A, B). Some unknowns appear to be products of reactions between metabolites and environmental compounds. For example, the peak at m/z 512.2181 appears to be a condensation product of glutathione with an environmental compound, based on C/N count and MS/MS (Figure S9). Efforts to more fully annotate the unknown peaks are ongoing. For the 663 metabolite ions with a formula match, we attempted to confirm their structures based on RT match to authenticated standards run in our laboratory or MS/MS spectral match to reference libraries. For example, the metabolite of m/z 171.006 assigned above to formula C3H9O6P was annotated as glycerol-3-phosphate based on RT match to the purified standard. Finally, 221 peak identities were confirmed, 148 by RT match and 73 by database MS/MS spectral match (Table 2, Supporting Information Table S10). About 40% of these metabolites were detected in both organisms. To evaluate PAVE, we used a list of 104 metabolites that were previously quantitated in E. coli using reversed-phase ion-pairing LC-MS with standard spiking (N = 104)44 From this list, PAVE correctly detected and assigned C/N counts for 82. For the missing compounds, reasons included intensity below the selected PAVE threshold of 103 (e.g., guanine), high background (e.g., citrate), quantitative error leading to low ρ in ATOMCOUNT (e.g., IMP), instability (e.g. acetoacetyl-CoA), and annotation as fragments (gluconate, dTDP, and dTTP, all of which are low abundance). In addition, adenosine and deoxyguanosine failed to chromatographically resolve and were recognized as one metabolite. As expected given our 99 percentile cut-off for carbon number versus mass, one compound (GTP) fell below this cut-off and was erroneously removed. For the 82 metabolites correctly assigned C/N counts, database search yielded the correct formula for 77. Using a 13C-labeling strategy similar in some respects to PAVE, Mahieu and Patti reduced 25,000 positive mode peaks from reversed-phase LC-MS to a set of 776 likely metabolite peaks with carbon number using de-adducting, de-isotoping, and 13C-based credentialing.28 This extent of reduction is similar to that achieved with PAVE. There are, however, important methodological differences between the two studies, which resulted in striking differences in the verified peaks. Methodologically, the present work is distinguished by HILIC chromatography, positive and negative ion mode analysis, and algorithmic improvements. Presumably due to these differences, of the 1500 biological peaks (assigned C and N count) that we observe in E. coli, only 122 overlap with peaks (assigned C count) found by Mathieu and Patti. Manual inspection identified that a number of putative metabolite ions reported by Mathieu and Patti are obvious adducts (e.g. sodium, potassium). Moreover, of the list of 104 quantified water soluble metabolites44, based on m/z match ± 10 ppm and C count, Mahieu and Patti found only ~ 7%, while PAVE detected ~ 80%. The ATOMCOUNT strategy is most easily applied to microorganisms that can be readily cultured in uniformly 15N and/or 13C media, and it should be immediately useful for examining different microbes. While complete labeling is more difficult to achieve in mammalian cells and intact multicellular organisms, upon feeding suitably labeled substrates45–48, the strategy may also be applicable to them, although this depends on either achievement of sufficiently complete labeling or algorithmic advances to deal with incomplete labeling. Importantly, even in the absence of such experiments, peak annotation from S. cerevisiae and E. coli immediately informs annotation of the same peaks from animal specimens. To this end, we looked in mouse liver data for peaks corresponding to 432 metabolite standards (that we routinely track in our lab, Table S8) augmented by an additional 663 metabolite ions with database formula match from the present analysis (Figure 5C). In liver, we found 158 peaks matching to the metabolite standards based on m/z and RT, and 324 peaks matching the additional metabolite ions from the present study. Thus, these efforts in microbes are already enhancing our ability to annotate untargeted LC-MS data from mammalian specimens, tripling the number of verified, readily measurable peaks that we can routinely track in liver. Our approach to annotate untargeted LC-MS data begins with growing cells in four different isotopic conditions: unlabeled, 13C, 15N, and 15C+13N (Figure 1). Mass shifts across these four conditions are used by an algorithm called ATOMCOUNT to identify biological peaks and their carbon and nitrogen atom counts. The biological peaks are then subjected to thorough de-adducting and de-isotoping by an algorithm called JUNKREMOVER. This algorithm identifies adducts and isotopic variants by relating them to their co-eluting metabolite ions ([M-H]- or [M+H]+), which may appear in the same ionization mode or (less commonly) only in the opposite ionization mode. Adducts have the same labeling patterns as their metabolite peak, facilitating accurate annotation. JUNKREMOVER also filters out peaks whose C counts are too low for the observed mass and ringing peaks which occur on both sides of intense ion peaks in orbitrap data. The remaining peaks are divided into fragment versus metabolite ions, based on the intensity of fragments increasing under a mild in-source CID voltage, whereas the intensity of the corresponding metabolite peaks decline. The resulting substantially verified metabolite peaks are assigned formulae based on their m/z and C/ N atom counts, and associated with known metabolites based on RT and/or MS/MS match. To implement this approach, S. cerevisiae strain FY4 and E. coli strain NCM3722 were each grown in minimal essential glucose-ammonia media in four different isotopic conditions: unlabeled, 15N, 13C, and 15C+13N (Table 1) and harvested in exponential phase. Triplicate biological samples for each condition were analyzed by untargeted HILIC LC-MS using an amide column and high-resolution full-scan MS1 analysis on a Q-Exactive instrument, with ~15,000 peaks detected in negative mode and ~30,000 peaks in positive mode. The core concept of ATOMCOUNT is that, if peak i of m/z Mi in the unlabeled sample is of biological origin, it should show a characteristic mass shift across labeled conditions. Moreover, the corresponding peaks (Mi +Ni, Mi +Ci, Mi +Ni+Ci) in the labeled samples should match the intensity of peak i in the unlabeled sample. For each peak i in the unlabeled sample, ATOMCOUNT records, from the raw data of the labeled samples at the unlabeled peak’s RT (± 20 s; chromatographic shifts of < 20 s accordingly do not impact the procedure), the highest signal intensity for masses (± 10 ppm) corresponding to every integer combination of Ni and Ci with Ni = {0, 1, 2, ..., Nmax} and Ci = {1, 2, ..., Cmax} with Nmax arbitrarily chosen to be 10 and Cmax the highest possible number of carbon atoms given the mass. For each combination of Ci and Ni, it computes the Pearson correlation (ρ) between the observed and expected intensity pattern (Figure 2). In cases where no values of Ni and Ci yield ρ > 0.75, the peak is discarded. In cases where multiple values of Ni and Ci yield ρ > 0.75, those yielding the highest value for ρ are accepted. An algorithmic advantage of ATOMCOUNT is retrieving the peaks in labeled samples, at the relevant masses and RT, directly from the raw data. This contrasts with prior approaches that compare list of picked peaks across the unlabeled and labeled samples. Directly querying the raw data avoids false negatives due to imperfect peak picking33. ATOMCOUNT identified less than 20% of peaks as having a logical labeling pattern (i.e. being biological peaks) (Table 2). Thus, a primary driver of the very large number “unknown” metabolites in many prior estimates is miscounting of environmental contaminants (i.e. chemicals not made by the microorganism, but instead found in water, tubes, etc.). Consistent with most of the discarded peaks being environmental contaminants, we observed ~ 80% of the discarded peaks in procedure blanks at intensities > 50% of that observed in the cellular samples. In contrast, only 10% of peaks retained by ATOMCOUNT were found at this level in the blank. Simple blank substrate, however, cannot substitute for the ATOMCOUNT procedure: even excluding peaks found in the blank, there are a roughly equal number of peaks that labeled and do not label. Moreover, ATOMCOUNT effectively annotates biological peaks with a C and N atom count that facilitates subsequent data analysis. In addition to the metabolite peaks ([M-H]- or [M+H]+), the list of biological peaks generated by ATOMCOUNT includes adducts, natural isotopic variants, and fragments. JUNKREMOVER systematically evaluates every peak returned by ATOMCOUNT and discards adducts and isotopic variants. As is typical13, this process begins with a pre-determined list of relevant adducts and isotopic variants and their associated mass deviations (D) from the metabolite ion. The list of adducts was initially obtained by literature search34 and was augmented by examination of our data, looking for common mass shifts among co-eluting peaks that could reasonably be explained by some form of adduct formation. With these lists in hand (Table S5 and S6), for each biological peak i in the unlabeled sample, JUNKREMOVER records from the raw data of the unlabeled samples (in both ionization modes), at the relevant RT, the peak intensity at Mi – D (one-by-one, for every candidate adduct and isotopic variant in this list, correcting by the mass of 2H when checking in the opposite mode). For de-adducting, the peak i is discarded if (i) the peak intensity at Mi – D is at least 20% of that at Mi, (ii) the peak at Mi – D passes the ATOMCOUNT criteria for a biological metabolite, and (iii) the C/N counts of the two peaks are equivalent. The value of 20% was based on our finding that, for known metabolites, either the [M+H]+ or [M+H]- peak is reliably at least 20% of the size of the largest adduct peak. Note that C and N atoms introduced by adduct formation, e.g. from formate or ammonia in the running buffer, are not of biological origin and therefore do not affect the C/N counts returned by ATOMCOUNT. As an example of the utility of labeling data for de-adducting, glucose gives rises to peaks at m/z 119.0349 [M-H-C2H4O2]-, 179.0560 [M-H]-, and m/z 239.0772 [M-H+C2H4O2]- in negative mode (Figure 3 A). The labeling data make clear that m/z 239.0772 is an adduct (as it matches the carbon count of m/z 179.0560) while m/z 119.0349 is a fragment (as it has two fewer carbons). As an example of the value of combined positive and negative mode analysis, the [M+Na]+ peak of glucose (Figure 3 B) was detected in positive mode and correctly recognized as an adduct by comparing to the [M-H]- peak in negative mode, despite the glucose [M+H]+ peak not being detectable. Overall, we observed more than 150 adducts whose proper assignment required comparison to metabolite peaks in the opposite polarity mode (Table 2). For candidate isotopic variants, the approach is identical to that for adducts, except that there is no requirement for 13C and 15N natural isotopic variants to match C/N counts, and for 18O and 34S, the peak intensity at mass i – D is required to be substantially greater than at mass i (20 times larger for 18O and 5 for 34S). To focus only on [M+H]+ and [M-H]- peaks, we also annotated doubly charged ions, which are relatively common in positive mode (Table 2). Similarly, we annotated homodimers (i) by searching for a peak at mass (i - 1)/2 (in negative mode) or (i + 1)/2 (in positive mode), where the C/N counts differ by exactly a factor of two. Collectively, these above steps in JUNKREMOVER annotate roughly 60% of the peaks found by ATOMCOUNT. Manual examination revealed that many of the remaining peaks had a surprisingly low C/N atom counts relative to the mass. We believe that these peaks with inappropriately low C/N count arise, at least in part, due to ions that are some combination of contaminants (such as solvent or plastic impurities) with an endogenous metabolite. This blending may occur during sample preparation (i.e. due to formation of covalent condensation products) or in the ESI source (i.e. due to adduct formation). To filter out such peaks, we eliminated those whose mass exceeded (i) the 99th percentile mass of unique endogenous metabolite molecular formulae in the HMBD database35 for that C count ± 2, and (ii) the cut-off for any lesser value of C. Especially in positive ion mode in S. cerevisiae, we observed many peaks exceeding this threshold (Figure 3 C, D). The number of peaks removed in this analysis depends on the percentile cutoff, which is a user parameter in JUNKREMOVER. The 99th percentile cutoff likely retains some peaks that are artifacts, while losing ~ 1% of real metabolite peaks. Using a 95th percentile cutoff would remove roughly an additional 20% of peaks (Table S4). In addition to the low C/N atom count peaks, we also observed ringing peaks which are a known artifact of Fourier transform-MS instruments including orbitraps. The ringing peaks occur in mass spectra symmetrically around high intensity peaks, shifted in mass by roughly ± 500 ppm (Figure S6A). The mass shift and relative intensity of ringing peaks is independent of MS resolution and ionization polarity (Figure S6B and C). To annotate ringing peaks, for each peak, we check if there is a larger peak at the same RT whose intensity is at least 100x higher and occurs within ±500 ppm; if so, the smaller peak is annotated as a ringing peak. Based on this analysis, about 2,000 of the initial peaks are ringing artifacts. While most of these were too noisy to be selected by ATOMCOUNT, 93 advanced into and were removed by JUNKREMOVER. After peak scrubbing by JUNKREMOVER, we obtained a peak list comprised substantially of metabolites and in-source fragments. The chemistry of fragmentation is more complicated than adduct formation. While certain fragmentation events are common (e.g. loss of water, ammonia), others are not easily predicted. Moreover, whereas adduct formation retains the C and N atom counts from labeling data, fragmentation does not except in certain situations such as loss of water. This makes comprehensive assignment of fragmentation events based solely on computational analysis of untargeted LC-MS data difficult.36,37 Accordingly, we sought a straightforward experimental approach to differentiate fragments from their parent ions. We reasoned that the application of a weak in-source CID voltage should increase signal intensity for fragments while decreasing it for of parent ions. Taking glucose as an example, two fragment ions (m/z 119.0349, m/z 101.0245) were observed at the retention time of glucose, corresponding to loss of C2H4O2 and C2H6O3. The intensity of both fragments increased with 2 eV and 4 eV in-source CID energy, while the intensity of the glucose parent ion at m/z 179.0560 and its adducts decreased. Higher energies resulted in further fragmentation from m/z 119.0349 to m/z 101.0245, which decreased signal intensity at m/z 119.0349, highlighting the importance of using low CID voltages. To test the general effectiveness of this approach, we examined how the intensities of metabolite ions and their fragments change in response to increasing in-source CID energies using 80 metabolite standards dissolved in extraction buffer (for individual compound data, see Table S9). Strikingly, each fragment ion increased at least somewhat at both 2 and 4 eV in-source CID energy, while every parent ion decreased (Figure 4). For 75 of the 80 known fragments, the increase was statistically significant at 4 eV (p < 0.05, t-test). This pattern held both for small robust compounds like malate and relatively labile-energy compounds like ATP. In-source CID is a built-in capacity in Thermo’s Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer. For other mass spectrometers, approaches such as all ion fragmentation can be used, and we verified that this approach works on Agilent’s 6550 Q-TOF, with the basic trend of metabolite signals decreasing and fragment signals increasing robust across a range of collision energies (Figure S8). The success of the in-source fragmentation approach depends on chromatographic resolution. For example, malate fragments to make an ion that mimics fumarate. Because malate and fumarate were chromatographically resolved38, we correctly annotated both the fragmentation event (at the retention time of malate, 12.9 min) and the genuine fumarate metabolite peak (at 11.6 min). At the same time, because we did not effectively separate linoleic and arachidonic acid from larger lipids, we discarded their peaks, because their abundances rose upon application of the CID voltage due to fragmentation of the co-eluting lipids. In ongoing work, we have also noted cases where the peak at [M+H]+ or [M-H]- rises in response to weak CID voltage due to an adduct peak breaking down to yield the (de)protonation peak. This seems only to be a problem, however, when the adduct peak is much more abundant than the (de)protonation peak, in which case the metabolite is better measured in the opposite polarity mode. Thus, despite some complexities, the weak in-source CID procedure is effective for distinguishing metabolite from fragment peaks. We accordingly applied this procedure to all peaks that were not rejected by the JUNKREMOVER algorithm (Table 2). This procedure annotated ~200 fragments in S. cerevisiae and ~150 in E. coli, leaving a set of total ~1500 peaks in S. cerevisiae and ~600 peaks in E. coli. The first step in metabolite identification from high resolution mass spectrometry data is chemical formula assignment. Owing to the rapid expansion of the number of possible atomic compositions with increasing masses, even with ± 2 ppm mass accuracy, m/z alone is typically insufficient for chemical formula assignment.15,39 For the list of metabolite peaks, we searched for matches to their m/z and C/N atom counts in a diversity of metabolite databases (Metlin40, Lipidmaps41, HMDB35, YMDB42 and ECMDB43). Take m/z 171.006 as an example: at 5 ppm accuracy, there are three candidate formulae: C3H9O6P, C6H8N2S2, C5H4N2O5, but only one of these matches the observed C count of 3 and N count of 0 (Figure S7). Another example is m/z 310.1634. Two formulae, C12H21N7O3 (m/z=310.1633) and C20H25NS (m/z=310.1635), give the same mass error (< 0.5 ppm), but are distinguished by C/N count. Overall, we obtained a database formula match based on m/z and C/N count for 663 peaks, about 30% of metabolite ions. There was a strong enrichment for peaks with formula match among the more intense peaks, whereas the smaller peaks were enriched for unknowns (Figure 5 A, B). Some unknowns appear to be products of reactions between metabolites and environmental compounds. For example, the peak at m/z 512.2181 appears to be a condensation product of glutathione with an environmental compound, based on C/N count and MS/MS (Figure S9). Efforts to more fully annotate the unknown peaks are ongoing. For the 663 metabolite ions with a formula match, we attempted to confirm their structures based on RT match to authenticated standards run in our laboratory or MS/MS spectral match to reference libraries. For example, the metabolite of m/z 171.006 assigned above to formula C3H9O6P was annotated as glycerol-3-phosphate based on RT match to the purified standard. Finally, 221 peak identities were confirmed, 148 by RT match and 73 by database MS/MS spectral match (Table 2, Supporting Information Table S10). About 40% of these metabolites were detected in both organisms. To evaluate PAVE, we used a list of 104 metabolites that were previously quantitated in E. coli using reversed-phase ion-pairing LC-MS with standard spiking (N = 104)44 From this list, PAVE correctly detected and assigned C/N counts for 82. For the missing compounds, reasons included intensity below the selected PAVE threshold of 103 (e.g., guanine), high background (e.g., citrate), quantitative error leading to low ρ in ATOMCOUNT (e.g., IMP), instability (e.g. acetoacetyl-CoA), and annotation as fragments (gluconate, dTDP, and dTTP, all of which are low abundance). In addition, adenosine and deoxyguanosine failed to chromatographically resolve and were recognized as one metabolite. As expected given our 99 percentile cut-off for carbon number versus mass, one compound (GTP) fell below this cut-off and was erroneously removed. For the 82 metabolites correctly assigned C/N counts, database search yielded the correct formula for 77. Using a 13C-labeling strategy similar in some respects to PAVE, Mahieu and Patti reduced 25,000 positive mode peaks from reversed-phase LC-MS to a set of 776 likely metabolite peaks with carbon number using de-adducting, de-isotoping, and 13C-based credentialing.28 This extent of reduction is similar to that achieved with PAVE. There are, however, important methodological differences between the two studies, which resulted in striking differences in the verified peaks. Methodologically, the present work is distinguished by HILIC chromatography, positive and negative ion mode analysis, and algorithmic improvements. Presumably due to these differences, of the 1500 biological peaks (assigned C and N count) that we observe in E. coli, only 122 overlap with peaks (assigned C count) found by Mathieu and Patti. Manual inspection identified that a number of putative metabolite ions reported by Mathieu and Patti are obvious adducts (e.g. sodium, potassium). Moreover, of the list of 104 quantified water soluble metabolites44, based on m/z match ± 10 ppm and C count, Mahieu and Patti found only ~ 7%, while PAVE detected ~ 80%. The ATOMCOUNT strategy is most easily applied to microorganisms that can be readily cultured in uniformly 15N and/or 13C media, and it should be immediately useful for examining different microbes. While complete labeling is more difficult to achieve in mammalian cells and intact multicellular organisms, upon feeding suitably labeled substrates45–48, the strategy may also be applicable to them, although this depends on either achievement of sufficiently complete labeling or algorithmic advances to deal with incomplete labeling. Importantly, even in the absence of such experiments, peak annotation from S. cerevisiae and E. coli immediately informs annotation of the same peaks from animal specimens. To this end, we looked in mouse liver data for peaks corresponding to 432 metabolite standards (that we routinely track in our lab, Table S8) augmented by an additional 663 metabolite ions with database formula match from the present analysis (Figure 5C). In liver, we found 158 peaks matching to the metabolite standards based on m/z and RT, and 324 peaks matching the additional metabolite ions from the present study. Thus, these efforts in microbes are already enhancing our ability to annotate untargeted LC-MS data from mammalian specimens, tripling the number of verified, readily measurable peaks that we can routinely track in liver. Here we “PAVE” the way to comprehensive annotation of the metabolites detected in untargeted LC/MS metabolomics data. The PAVE strategy combines isotopic labeling and computational data analysis to pick out biological peaks, assign C and N atom counts, and annotate adducts and natural isotopic variants. Remaining peaks are then discriminated from fragments based on a simple experimental strategy involving selective enhancement of fragment intensity by applying a weak in-source CID energy. PAVE annotates < 20% of all LC-MS peaks as biological, with about 25% of biological peaks recognized as putative metabolites and 30% of putative metabolites matching known formula. The PAVE workflow is immediately applicable to any organism that can be grown on uniformly 13C and 15N-labeled nutrients, opening up the possibility for metabolome annotation for less studied microbes that may have advantageous properties for industrial metabolic engineering or biofuel production. Overall, PAVE discarded 96% of peaks and credentialed roughly 2000 peaks with C and N counts, a greater number of credentialed peaks with atom counts than prior efforts22,25,27,28. The outcome of our peak annotation by PAVE supports the emerging consensus that common microbes contain at most a few thousand readily detectable metabolites. A critical question is whether most of the peaks annotated as unknown metabolites here are truly biological metabolites, or reflect currently unappreciated types of artifacts. We hope that the credentialed peak list reported here will spur further work to elucidate the molecular formulae and structures giving rise to these peaks. As annotation is carried out in different contexts, it seems likely that studies will converge on a relatively small set of true water-soluble metabolites, perhaps in the range of 1000.