Many bacteria have become resistant to conventional antibiotics, necessitating the discovery of novel antimicrobial compounds (CDC, 2013). To combat the lack of novel antimicrobial discovery, many bioinformatic approaches have been developed to mine the genomes of bacteria for natural products (Fields, Lee, & McConnell, 2017). One promising class of natural products is bacteriocins, the ribosomally produced antimicrobial peptides of bacteria (Alvarez-Sieiro, Montalbán-López, Mu, & Kuipers, 2016). These chemically and functionally diverse peptides are divided into two classes. The Class I bacteriocins undergo extensive posttranslational modifications, whereas the Class II bacteriocins consist of peptides that do not undergo posttranslational modification (Alvarez-Sieiro et al., 2016). These peptides are often located in genetic clusters containing genes for bacteriocin maturation, export, and immunity. The bacteriocin structural gene is often expressed as a prepropeptide, consisting of the unmodified functional domain and an N-terminal leader sequence. After posttranslational modification and leader peptide cleavage, the mature peptide is exported by an ABC-cassette type transporter (Alvarez-Sieiro et al., 2016; Morton, Freed, Lee, & Friedberg, 2015). Genome mining approaches capitalize on the bacteriocin operon-like structure to identify bacteriocin candidates through two approaches: identification of the bacteriocin precursor gene or identification of context genes (Fields et al., 2017; Hammami, Zouhir, Hamida, & Fliss, 2007; Morton et al., 2015; Van Heel, De Jong, Montalbá N-Ló Pez, Kok, & Kuipers, 2013). Online mining tools, such as BAGEL and BACTIBASE, allow investigators to identify and classify putative bacteriocins based on their homology to known bacteriocin genes (Hammami et al., 2007; Van Heel et al., 2013). Large sequence heterogeneity and a lack of experimentally determined bacteriocins make identifying novel bacteriocins using BLAST and other sequence similarity approaches difficult (Morton et al., 2015). To overcome these problems, some prediction software identifies novel bacteriocins by searching for conserved context genes of the bacteriocin operon (Donia et al., 2014; Morton et al., 2015). The bacteriocin operon and gene block associator (BOA) identifies context genes through homology-based genome searches (Morton et al., 2015). BOA has identified 95% of BAGEL annotated bacteriocins in addition to 1,033 putative bacteriocins not identified by BAGEL. Another tool, MetaRiPPquest, connects genomic bacteriocin predictions to tandem mass spectrometry data attempting to bridge the gap between computational and in vitro identification (Mohimani et al., 2017). While context-based approaches seem to circumvent the need for sequence similarity, novel methods that move away from homology-based mining tools are still needed. Recently, k-mer based machine learning approaches have been used successfully to classify protein sequences without the need for homology (Hamid & Friedberg, 2018; Mikolov, Corrado, Chen, & Dean, 2013). Previous studies have used similar approaches to discriminate antimicrobial peptide sequences from non-antimicrobial peptides on the basis of their biophysical characteristics: charge density, hydrophobicity, amphipathicity, propensity for disorder, and aggregation (Vishnepolsky & Pirtskhalava, 2014). Despite the approach, in vitro verification of antimicrobial activity is essential to provide empirical evidence for the efficacy of these techniques. This is especially true for the in vitro verification of putative bacteriocins as they represent a very functionally diverse class of antimicrobial peptides. First, bacteriocins have diverse mechanisms of action with most having specific targets within or on host cells; for example, microcin B17 (MccB17) inhibits the activity of DNA gyrase while nisin inhibits peptidoglycan synthesis by binding to lipid II (Field, Cotter, Hill, & Ross, 2015; Kleerebezem, 2004; Vizan, Hernandez-Chico, Del Castillo, & Moreno1, 1991). Second, bacteriocins may exhibit a very narrow spectrum of activity. Finally, some bacteriocins may not have bacterial targets. Streptolysin S (SLS) is structurally similar to MccB17 as both are thiazole–oxazole modified microcins; however, SLS is a virulence factor that promotes invasion upon Group A Streptococcus infection (Lee et al., 2008). However, some bacteriocins target the bacterial membrane in a nonspecific fashion through electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions, including the circular bacteriocin, enterocin AS-48 (Sánchez-Hidalgo et al., 2011). Recently, we have shown that membrane-targeting bacteriocins can serve as templates for the design of synthetic antimicrobial peptides (Fields et al., 2018). Using the AS-48 homologue, safencin AS-48, we created a synthetic peptide corresponding to the membrane interacting region of enterocin AS-48 (Angeles Jiménez, Barrachi-Saccilotto, Valdivia, Maqueda, & Rico, 2005; Sánchez-Hidalgo et al., 2011). This region is a cationic, hydrophobic, alpha-helical peptide that abstracts the full-length 70 amino acid bacteriocin to a 25-mer peptide, which retains antimicrobial activity. The biophysical qualities (overall positive charge, amphipathicity, and helicity) of the synthetic bacteriocin peptide are very similar to the biophysical profiles of synthetic antimicrobial peptides derived from eukaryotic sources, whose activity relies on their overall positive charge, conformation, and amphipathicity (Fjell, Hiss, Hancock, & Schneider, 2012; Jiang et al., 2008; Ong, Wiradharma, & Yang, 2014; Thaker, Cankaya, Scott, & Tew, 2013). To determine if these biophysical guidelines could select for regions of putative membrane-targeting bacteriocins, we wrote a script to scan 20 amino acid stretches along the length of a putative bacteriocin and scored each 20-mer for charge, alpha-helical propensity, and hydrophobic moment. Peptides with the highest scores in all three categories exhibited significant antimicrobial activity. This approach represents a method by which the membrane-targeting regions of putative bacteriocins can be rapidly selected, synthesized, and verified in vitro. We selected an initial set of putative novel bacteriocins using a word-embedding algorithm, Word2vec, as described previously (Hamid & Friedberg, 2018). Briefly, we created a vocabulary of all possible 8,000 amino-acid trimers. Each trimer is then represented as a vector, which captures the probabilities of that trimer being in the neighborhood of other trimers, also known as the skip-gram model (Mikolov et al., 2013). Each protein sequence was then represented as the sum of vectors representing the trimers comprising the protein. We then trained several supervised learning models with a positive set of 346 known bacteriocins and a negative set of the same size. The best performing method, and support vector machine, was then used to discover the set of 676 putative bacteriocins used in this study. In essence, the machine-learning algorithm employed thus generates a list of new bacteriocin-like sequences that preserve key evolved features of natural bacteriocin products. We eliminated from the list all known bacteriocins that were discovered using BLAST against GenBank with an e-value of 10−3 or less, and which were annotated as bacteriocins. The result was a set of 676 putative bacteriocins not obviously homologous, by sequence similarity, to existing bacteriocins. Using a sliding window, we generated 28,895 20-mers from the 676 predicted peptides, and calculated the following biophysical parameters for each 20-mer candidate: (a) charge, (b) helicity, and (c) hydrophobic moment (Figure 1; Chou & Fasman, 1974; Eisenberg, Weiss, & Terwilliger, 1984; Monera, Sereda, Zhou, Kay, & Hodges, 1995). Net charge was calculated as a sum of the charge for each amino acid at pH 7. Helicity was calculated as a sum of the Chou–Fasman probabilities of each amino acid. Finally, the hydrophobic moment was calculated using the hydrophobicity values for each residue assuming that the 20-mer peptides would adopt an alpha helical structure. For each of the biophysical parameters, the 20-mers were ranked as high, middle, or low based on the range of scores within that parameter (Figure 2a). An overall score was calculated in which peptides scoring low, middle, or high in a parameter received a 0, 1, or 2, respectively, for that parameter. The three score values were summed for final overall score from 0 to 6, where 0 is an all lowscoring peptide and a 6 is an all high-scoring peptide. To evaluate our biophysical parameter scores, we selected a total of sixteen 20-mer peptides for synthesis and further experimentation. Peptides were synthesized by Genscript (Piscataway, NJ), to >95% purity and verified by high performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. All peptides were dissolved in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) (Thermo Fischer) for subsequent experimentation. Escherichia coli BL-21 (Thermo Fischer) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 (gift from J. Shrout at the University of Notre Dame) were grown in Luria Burtani (LB) broth Miller (EMD chemicals, Gibbstown NJ). Staphylococcus aureus USA300 was grown in Todd Hewitt broth (Neogen Corporation, Lansing, MI). All cultures were grown at 37°C. Minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of the 20-mer peptides were determined via microtiter dilution assay (Wiegand, Hilpert, & Hancock, 2008). Briefly, dilute bacterial cultures were added to a series of serial twofold dilutions of peptide in Mueller-Hinton broth (Thermo Fischer). The lowest concentration at which no bacterial growth was observed after overnight incubation at 37°C was defined as the MIC. If an MIC could be determined, cultures from the MIC experiment were plated and incubated overnight at 37°C. The concentration at which no colonies were visible after overnight incubation was defined as the minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC). MIC assays were carried out in biological triplicate. Antibiofilm activity of the peptides was assessed using USA300 and PAO1. For USA300 biofilms, overnight cultures grown in tryptic soy broth (TSB) (Sigma-Aldrich) were diluted 1:100 in TSB of 0.1% glucose and 1% NaCl with or without peptide (Cue et al., 2015). For PAO1 biofilms, overnight cultures grown in LB were diluted 1:100 in M63 of 1 mM MgSO4 and 0.4% arginine with or without peptide (Beaudoin, Zhang, Hinz, Parr, & Mah, 2012). Samples were incubated for 24 hr in a microplate. Planktonic cells were removed from the wells and the biofilms were washed three times with ddH2O. Biofilms were then stained with 0.1% crystal violet, washed three times with ddH2O, and resuspended in 30% acetic acid (O’Toole, 2011). These were then quantified by OD 550 reading on a Synergy Microplate Reader (Biotek). Eukaryotic cytotoxicity was determined by ethidium homodimer and hemolysis assays. Ethidium homodimer assays were carried out with HaCaT cells in 24-well culture dishes grown to 90% confluency in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Dibco). Medium was aspirated, and cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS;Thermo Fischer). Peptide in fresh DMEM was added to the cells at the desired concentration. Cells were incubated with peptide for 16 hr. Medium was aspirated, and cells were washed with PBS. Cells were incubated in 4 μM ethidium homodimer (Molecular Probes) in PBS for 30 min. Fluorescence was determined by 528 nm excitation and 617 nm emission at a cutoff value of 590 nm. Saponin (0.1%) was then added to each well and incubated for 20 min. The fluorescence was read again. Percent membrane permeabilization was determined by dividing the initial fluorescence by the second fluorescence reading. For hemolysis assays, 100 μl of sheep red blood cells (RBCs) were washed three times in cold PBS. Washed cells were resuspended in 25 ml of PBS. Triton, PBS, or peptide in 10% DMSO/PBS were added to 180 μl of resuspended RBCs and incubated at 37°C for 1 hr. Samples were read at 450 nm. Data were expressed as percent hemolysis by relativizing to the Triton and PBS controls. Hemolysis assays were done in triplicate. We selected an initial set of putative novel bacteriocins using a word-embedding algorithm, Word2vec, as described previously (Hamid & Friedberg, 2018). Briefly, we created a vocabulary of all possible 8,000 amino-acid trimers. Each trimer is then represented as a vector, which captures the probabilities of that trimer being in the neighborhood of other trimers, also known as the skip-gram model (Mikolov et al., 2013). Each protein sequence was then represented as the sum of vectors representing the trimers comprising the protein. We then trained several supervised learning models with a positive set of 346 known bacteriocins and a negative set of the same size. The best performing method, and support vector machine, was then used to discover the set of 676 putative bacteriocins used in this study. In essence, the machine-learning algorithm employed thus generates a list of new bacteriocin-like sequences that preserve key evolved features of natural bacteriocin products. We eliminated from the list all known bacteriocins that were discovered using BLAST against GenBank with an e-value of 10−3 or less, and which were annotated as bacteriocins. The result was a set of 676 putative bacteriocins not obviously homologous, by sequence similarity, to existing bacteriocins. Using a sliding window, we generated 28,895 20-mers from the 676 predicted peptides, and calculated the following biophysical parameters for each 20-mer candidate: (a) charge, (b) helicity, and (c) hydrophobic moment (Figure 1; Chou & Fasman, 1974; Eisenberg, Weiss, & Terwilliger, 1984; Monera, Sereda, Zhou, Kay, & Hodges, 1995). Net charge was calculated as a sum of the charge for each amino acid at pH 7. Helicity was calculated as a sum of the Chou–Fasman probabilities of each amino acid. Finally, the hydrophobic moment was calculated using the hydrophobicity values for each residue assuming that the 20-mer peptides would adopt an alpha helical structure. For each of the biophysical parameters, the 20-mers were ranked as high, middle, or low based on the range of scores within that parameter (Figure 2a). An overall score was calculated in which peptides scoring low, middle, or high in a parameter received a 0, 1, or 2, respectively, for that parameter. The three score values were summed for final overall score from 0 to 6, where 0 is an all lowscoring peptide and a 6 is an all high-scoring peptide. To evaluate our biophysical parameter scores, we selected a total of sixteen 20-mer peptides for synthesis and further experimentation. Peptides were synthesized by Genscript (Piscataway, NJ), to >95% purity and verified by high performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry. All peptides were dissolved in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) (Thermo Fischer) for subsequent experimentation. Escherichia coli BL-21 (Thermo Fischer) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 (gift from J. Shrout at the University of Notre Dame) were grown in Luria Burtani (LB) broth Miller (EMD chemicals, Gibbstown NJ). Staphylococcus aureus USA300 was grown in Todd Hewitt broth (Neogen Corporation, Lansing, MI). All cultures were grown at 37°C. Minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of the 20-mer peptides were determined via microtiter dilution assay (Wiegand, Hilpert, & Hancock, 2008). Briefly, dilute bacterial cultures were added to a series of serial twofold dilutions of peptide in Mueller-Hinton broth (Thermo Fischer). The lowest concentration at which no bacterial growth was observed after overnight incubation at 37°C was defined as the MIC. If an MIC could be determined, cultures from the MIC experiment were plated and incubated overnight at 37°C. The concentration at which no colonies were visible after overnight incubation was defined as the minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC). MIC assays were carried out in biological triplicate. Antibiofilm activity of the peptides was assessed using USA300 and PAO1. For USA300 biofilms, overnight cultures grown in tryptic soy broth (TSB) (Sigma-Aldrich) were diluted 1:100 in TSB of 0.1% glucose and 1% NaCl with or without peptide (Cue et al., 2015). For PAO1 biofilms, overnight cultures grown in LB were diluted 1:100 in M63 of 1 mM MgSO4 and 0.4% arginine with or without peptide (Beaudoin, Zhang, Hinz, Parr, & Mah, 2012). Samples were incubated for 24 hr in a microplate. Planktonic cells were removed from the wells and the biofilms were washed three times with ddH2O. Biofilms were then stained with 0.1% crystal violet, washed three times with ddH2O, and resuspended in 30% acetic acid (O’Toole, 2011). These were then quantified by OD 550 reading on a Synergy Microplate Reader (Biotek). Eukaryotic cytotoxicity was determined by ethidium homodimer and hemolysis assays. Ethidium homodimer assays were carried out with HaCaT cells in 24-well culture dishes grown to 90% confluency in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Dibco). Medium was aspirated, and cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS;Thermo Fischer). Peptide in fresh DMEM was added to the cells at the desired concentration. Cells were incubated with peptide for 16 hr. Medium was aspirated, and cells were washed with PBS. Cells were incubated in 4 μM ethidium homodimer (Molecular Probes) in PBS for 30 min. Fluorescence was determined by 528 nm excitation and 617 nm emission at a cutoff value of 590 nm. Saponin (0.1%) was then added to each well and incubated for 20 min. The fluorescence was read again. Percent membrane permeabilization was determined by dividing the initial fluorescence by the second fluorescence reading. For hemolysis assays, 100 μl of sheep red blood cells (RBCs) were washed three times in cold PBS. Washed cells were resuspended in 25 ml of PBS. Triton, PBS, or peptide in 10% DMSO/PBS were added to 180 μl of resuspended RBCs and incubated at 37°C for 1 hr. Samples were read at 450 nm. Data were expressed as percent hemolysis by relativizing to the Triton and PBS controls. Hemolysis assays were done in triplicate. From the initial set of 676 putative bacteriocins discovered using the word-embedding algorithm, Word2vec, a total of 28,895 20-mer bacteriocin peptide candidates were generated (Figure 1). Each peptide was then assigned a low, middle, or high ranking for each of the biophysical parameters based on the range of scores within that parameter (Figure 2a). For example, a peptide with a net charge of 5, a helical score of 17, and a μH of 900 would rank middle for charge, low for helicity, and high for μH (Figure 2a). Of note, 80% of the 20-mers received a low ranking for charge (a net positive charge between +1 and +3) while only 1% ranked high (Figure 2b). For the hydrophobic moment values, a majority of the peptides also ranked low (any hydrophobic moment value below 333) with only 5% receiving a high score (Figure 2b). However, for the helicity score, a majority of the peptides, 65%, fell into the middle range of scores between 19 and 22 with only 2% scoring high for helicity (Figure 2b). To calculate an overall score for each of the peptides, high, middle, and low parameters were associated with a value of 2, 1, or 0, respectively. Therefore, the sum of values for each of the three parameters represents the overall score of the peptide. From this approach, we obtained a range of values from 0 to 6, where a 0 is a peptide that scored low in all three parameters and a 6 is a peptide that scored high in all three parameters. About 90% of the 20-mers had overall scores ranging from 0 to 2. As a majority of bacteriocins have been found to target specific cellular components, this overwhelming majority of unlikely-to-be membrane targeting peptides is unsurprising (Figure S1). Peptides with an overall score of 3 represented only 9% of the 20-mers generated. Finally, the last 1% of peptides received overall scores from 4 to 6. Overall scores of 5 or 6 represents peptides that are very likely to be membrane targeting; however, this group consisted of only <1% of all the 20-mers generated (Figure S1). Many cationic antimicrobial peptides will adopt an amphipathic, alpha-helical conformation; therefore, of the peptides generated by our script, those ranking high in all three biophysical categories should yield the most antimicrobial activity. We focused onto the top 10% of 20-mers generated by the script for further study (Figure S1). Of the 16 peptides selected for synthesis, Peptides 1 and 2 received overall scores of 0 while Peptides 3 and 4 received overall scores of 6 (Table S1). The remaining 12 peptides were selected from the peptides with overall scores of 5 and 4 (Table S1). To determine if our biophysical selection criteria were able to accurately predict an amphipathic alpha-helical structure of the peptides selected for synthesis, we modeled their secondary structure using the PEP-FOLD online tool. For Peptides 1 and 2, which received low scores for helicity and hydrophobic moment, their structures are predicted to exist as a majority random coil (Figure 3a). In contrast, Peptides 3 and 4, having high scores for helicity and hydrophobic moment, are predicted to exist as fully extended alpha helices with clear clustering of the polar and charged amino acids to one side of the helix and the hydrophobic residues on the other, indicative of a strong hydrophobic moment (Figure 3b). Peptides 5 through 10 have a high helicity score; however, the modeling predictions expect unstructured regions owing to helix-breaking residues glycine and proline that occur within their sequences (Figure 3 and Table 1). All of these peptides also received middle scores for their hydrophobic moment, which is visible as hydrophobic residues within the polar face of the helix, such as Peptide 6, and charged amino acids within the hydrophobic face, such as Peptide 9. Peptide 11 is predicted to exist as a beta sheet (Figure 3e). The biophysical calculator only considers the Chou–Fasman helical propensity score and does not calculate the individual likelihood of forming a beta sheet; therefore, peptides with a higher sheet propensity were not excluded from the list of peptides for synthesis. The peptides were assessed for their MIC and MBC on E. coli, S. aureus, and P. aeruginosa (Table 2). As expected, Peptides 1 and 2, which scored low in all three biophysical parameters, did not have activity against any of the organisms tested. Peptides 3 and 4, which scored high in all three biophysical parameters, exhibited antimicrobial activity against both E. coli and P. aeruginosa (Table 2). Peptides 5–7 scored high in charge and helicity and middle in hydrophobic moment (Table 1). Interestingly, these peptides showed a range of antimicrobial activities (Table 2). Peptide 6 was more efficient at inhibiting the growth of P. aeruginosa (MIC = 32 μM) than E. coli (MIC = 128 μM). Peptides 5 and 7 were much less active than Peptide 6 despite having similar values for their biophysical scores (Table 1). Peptides 8–10 scored high for helicity with middle scores for charge and hydrophobic moment. Peptides scoring high in any one of the biophysical parameters with only middle scores for the others (Peptides 8–16) did not have a detectable MIC. Despite not having a true MIC, we observed that Peptides 11 and 16 were able to significantly reduce the overnight growth of S. aureus cultures (Figure 4a,b). To investigate if these peptides were exerting antibiofilm effects, we employed the biofilm formation assay. Upon incubation with Peptide 11, we observed a significant decrease in S. aureus USA300 biofilm formation down to a concentration of 4 μM (Figure 4c). While Peptide 16 inhibited biofilm formation down to 16 μM (Figure 4d) Peptides 11 and 16 exhibited no bacteriostatic effects on the biofilm producer P. aeruginosa PAO1 (Figure S2a,b). However, these peptides exerted antibiofilm activity down to 16 μM (Figure S2c,d). To determine if our biophysical parameters were able to select for peptides with affinity for bacterial membranes instead of mammalian membranes, we assessed their ability to compromise the membranes of erythrocytes and keratinocytes only, Peptides 2 and 10 exhibited increased levels of hemolysis at only the highest concentrations (128 μM). All of the peptides were unable to cause cell death when incubated with HaCaT cells for 16 hr at the highest concentrations (Table S1). Together, these data indicate that these peptides generally do not target mammalian membranes. Bacteriocins are a barely tapped source of antimicrobials. However, verifying the antimicrobial activity of putative bacteriocins can be difficult due to their potentially narrow activity spectra and highly diverse mechanisms (Alvarez-Sieiro et al., 2016; Cotter, Ross, & Hill, 2013). Here, we describe a strategy by which de novo mining of bacteriocins can be parsed using a biophysical algorithm to identify minimally active bacteriocin peptide candidates. Predictive algorithms coupled with biophysical selection and minimal candidate design allows for the development of novel, highly active, synthetic bacteriocins that have wide applicability as antimicrobial compounds. Previous studies have shown that synthetic peptide variants of full-length bacteriocins can be used to approximate their antimicrobial function. For example, linear variants of enterocin AS-48, a circular bacteriocin consisting of five alpha helices, have been shown to retain some of the antimicrobial activity of the parent that is dependent on the cationic and hydrophobic residues present within helices 4 and 5 that are designated as the membrane-interacting regions (Angeles Jiménez et al., 2005; Cruz, Ramos, Melo, & Martinez-Salazar, 2013; Sánchez-Hidalgo et al., 2011). Recently, we published a strategy whereby the membrane-interacting region in an AS-48 homologue was used as a template to create a series of small, optimized antimicrobial peptides (Fields et al., 2018). This establishes a precedent by which synthetic peptides can be used to approximate the activity of the full-length bacteriocin. In the case of AS-48, truncating the bacterocin into a “minimal membrane targeting unit” removes some of the functionality of the full-length bacteriocin. While the full length, circularized AS-48 dimerizes in solution and then targets the bacterial membrane, its reductive linear variants function through a mechanism more akin to the carpet or barrel-stave pore mechanism of membrane disruption (Cebrian et al., 2015; Fields et al., 2018). While full-length AS-48 has MICs against Gram-negative bacteria in the range of 0.42–0.83 μM, its reductive linear variants, consisting of the putative membrane interaction region, are much less active with MICs a 100-fold higher than the full-length peptide (Hemu, Qiu, Nguyen, & Tam, 2016; Montalbán-López et al., 2008; Sánchez-Hidalgo et al., 2011). However, this antimicrobial activity has been associated to the presence of hydrophobic and cationic residues within the membrane-interacting regions as activity is lost when the overall hydrophobicity of this region is reduced (Angeles Jiménez et al., 2005). These studies indicate that reductive, synthetic variants of membrane-targeting bacteriocins can be used to approximate their activity. While some antimicrobial activity is lost in the truncation process, membrane disrupting capacity should still be retained as long the region can adopt a secondary structure that is sufficiently charged and hydrophobic(Angeles Jiménez et al., 2005; Fields et al., 2018). We have built upon these previous studies by utilizing the biophysical parameters of synthetic antimicrobial peptide design to select for membrane interacting regions from putative bacteriocins (Angeles Jiménez et al., 2005). Peptides with the highest scores for the biophysical parameters of charge, helicity, and hydrophobic moment were the most active against the bacteria tested (Tables 1 and 2). Interestingly, the only two peptides to meet these criteria were from the same putative bacteriocin. It is therefore highly likely that this putative bacteriocin works in a membrane active manner (Fjell et al., 2012; Lee, Hall, & Aguilar, 2016). The interpretation of these data becomes confounded for the peptides whose biophysical parameters begin to receive middle scores. For example, Peptide 6, with a middle score for hydrophobic moment, is a more effective antimicrobial against P. aeruginosa, MIC = 32 μM, than E. coli, MIC = 128 μM (Table 2). This observation is in contrast to the activities of the high-scoring Peptides 3 and 4, whose antimicrobial activities were higher against E. coli (Tables 1 and 2). Therefore, it may be possible to tune antimicrobial specificity by modifying the biophysical scores (Bagheri, Keller, & Dathe, 2011; Datta et al., 2016). The techniques described herein have potential for linking de novo computational bacteriocin discovery with immediate therapeutic development. With the increasing number of computationally identified putative antimicrobial compounds, there is a mounting need to verify their antimicrobial activity in vitro (Hammami et al., 2007; Morton et al., 2015; Van Heel et al., 2013). Our method validates the use of machine-learning algorithms to mine genomic information for putative bacteriocins that can be refined using biophysical selection and size optimization for rapid synthesis and testing. The lack of mammalian cell cytotoxicity in our synthesized peptide set indicates that filtering minimal bacteriocin candidates based on our biophysical parameters selects for candidates that specifically target bacterial membranes (Table 1 and Table S1). Many current synthetic antimicrobial peptides used to treat human disease have been built around an existing scaffold from eukaryotes (Ashby, Petkova, & Hilpert, 2014). Novel AMP scaffolds identified through novel machine learning and minimal domain strategies can be subjected to further modification to refine their antimicrobial and cytotoxic properties (Gao et al., 2018). Our strategy to combine machine learning for de novo bacteriocin discovery along with biophysical refinement and minimal design represents a particularly robust workflow for the development of new antibiotic compounds. These synthetic bacteriocin scaffolds could be further refined via iterative testing and data collection for efficacy and selectivity. Eck Institute for Global Health, Grant/Award Number: Pilot Project Program; National GEM Consortium, Grant/Award Number: GEM Fellowship; National Science Foundation, Grant/Award Numbers: ABI-1458359, ABI-1551363, Graduate Research Fellowship; National Institutes of Health, Grant/Award Number: 1DP2 OD008468-01