Peptide-based therapeutics [1] have gained significant momentum by occupying a unique position between small molecules and biologics; to date, over 100 peptide drugs have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. Over the past decades, peptides are prominent in therapeutic areas [1] like infectious diseases, oncology, metabolic disorders (e.g. glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists like liraglutide), and neurological conditions and are finding applications in many areas, including biomedicine, biotechnology, bio nanotechnology, cosmetics, and food science [2–4]. Their unique ability to selectively bind to a wide range of biological targets, including proteins, membranes, and nucleic acids, protein–protein interfaces [5], makes them particularly attractive for addressing challenging proteins that remain resistant to conventional small-molecule drugs. In earlier times, certain therapeutic peptides, such as insulin, melittin, apamin, and mastoparan, were extracted from animal sources [6, 7]. Later, the peptides were synthesized through recombinant DNA technology using Escherichia coli as the expression system. Further, the solid-phase peptide synthesis technique enabled the synthesis of peptides with any amino acid sequence and any size in larger quantities [8]. Despite advances, peptide drug development continues to face persistent challenges related to proteolytic stability, membrane permeability, oral bioavailability, and delivery to the intended target sites, further limiting clinical translation. Traditional peptide discovery workflows were largely ruled by rational design, combinatorial libraries, and iterative experimental screening, which are time-consuming, resource-intensive, and often restricted to small portions of chemical space [9, 10]. Data-driven approaches such as machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) enabled the systematic analysis of large peptide datasets, the prediction of peptide structures, and the characterization of their physicochemical and biological properties [11]. Further, generative models, protein language models (PLM), reinforcement learning (RL), and structure-aware algorithms have collectively expanded the scope of computational peptide design, enabling exploration beyond manually curated motifs [12]. Several recent reviews have surveyed traditional physics-based and artificial intelligence (AI) approaches for peptide discovery, with emphasis on prediction of 3D structure, protein–peptide interaction, and assessment of immunogenicity and various ADMET properties such as safety, toxicity, solubility, bioavailability, and cell permeability [13, 14]. While these works provide valuable overviews of AI-based approaches in predicting various peptide structures and properties, the peptide data availability, featurization, model implementation, and performance analysis are not discussed in detail. In this review, we provide a comprehensive and critical survey of AI-driven peptide therapeutics, emphasizing their methodological advances, underlying assumptions, and limitations of these approaches. The features and descriptors calculations, along with relevant datasets used in general for these classification models, will be discussed in some detail, followed by the metrics of different models. We further organize existing approaches into conceptual modeling paradigms, examine data quality and evaluation practices, and analyze representative application domains, including antimicrobial, cancer, metabolic, and undruggable targets. This review aims to clarify the current capabilities of AI-based peptide design by integrating methodological, biological, and translational perspectives and outlining the key challenges that must be addressed to enable robust and clinically actionable discovery. As the peptide chemical space is astronomical in size, it is virtually impossible to use experimental high-throughput techniques to evaluate the usefulness of peptides for different therapeutic applications, and data-driven approaches appear indispensable [15]. Figure 1 highlights the key differences between traditional high-throughput screening and AI-driven approaches for peptide design and optimization. While the former is slow, resource-intensive, and laborious, AI and generative AI (GenAI) approaches accelerate peptide discovery with optimal drug-like properties. Various ML and DL models have been reported in the literature for predicting peptide properties [16, 17]. The review focuses on their potential application in peptide design aided by GenAI, RL, diffusion models, and large language models (LLMs). The feature and descriptor calculations, along with the relevant datasets used in these classification models, will be quantitatively discussed using various metrics. Currently, various ML models have been reported in the literature for classifying peptides into the following categories: amyloidogenic peptides, anticancer peptides, antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) (antiviral, antifungal, and antibacterial), toxic peptides, allergic peptides, antihypertensive peptides, nucleolar targeting peptides, cell-permeable peptides, and anti-inflammatory peptides [18, 19]. Comparative overview of traditional versus AI-enhanced peptide discovery workflows; the traditional approach (left) follows a linear process: target selection, manual or heuristic peptide design, synthesis, and experimental validation, a cycle often characterized by slow iteration, high cost, and limited design space; in contrast, the AI-enhanced workflow (right) integrates advanced computational tools, including generative models, ML-based property prediction, and RL-driven optimization; a central feedback loop connects experimental validation to upstream AI models, enabling continuous learning and refinement; this closed-loop design accelerates discovery, improves prediction accuracy, and facilitates MOO of therapeutic peptides. As the force-fields for the physics-based models, such as molecular dynamics (MD), datasets are central to data-driven modeling. The data are extracted from various experimental measurements, including X-ray Diffraction (XRD), neutron diffraction, electron microscopy, Circular Dichroism (CD), Infrared (IR), Raman, and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR). In general, databases are collected from the literature and patents using key search terms, employing different data mining tools (e.g. PubMedmineR) and web-scraping tools (e.g. Selenium). Databases usually aggregate or segregate groups of chemicals or peptides with specific properties and activities. Table 1 lists various peptide databases reported in the literature, and it also provides the criteria used for segregating the peptide sequences [20–62]. Data-driven models such as ML, DL, and GenAI for predicting peptide properties, classifying them into different categories, or designing novel peptides rely on pre-existing information about peptide sequences and their properties, collected through various experimental techniques. Databases usually categorize the peptides based on their activities or other drug-like properties. In certain cases, the properties presented have continuous values (IC50, half-life, folding time), and in the remaining cases, only annotations (labels) are available (membrane or Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB) permeability). Figure 2b shows the number of peptide databases that appeared during the last two decades, while Table 1 lists the number of peptides in different peptide libraries [20–62]. The Peptipedia v2.0 [43] and PeptideAtlas [44] are the largest peptide databases reported in the literature, with 3.9 and 1 M peptides, respectively. The Peptipedia database is a collection of 0.1 M peptides with known biological activities, including antimicrobial, antiviral, anti-aging, cosmetic, and dermatological activities. This most comprehensive database provides access to 40 000, 5500, and 7000 antimicrobial [20–32], antiviral [33–35], and antifungal peptides, respectively. In addition, it provides binary classification models for characterizing peptides into different categories. The PeptideAtlas database is a collection of peptides from tandem mass spectrometry proteomics experiments in human, mouse, and yeast sources, and no annotation is provided for these peptides [44]. Table 1 lists two of the structurally annotated peptide databases. Xiao et al. [45] have built a comprehensive database of therapeutic peptides, including 58 583 peptides with structural information and classifying them into 47 categories. In the database, 21 130 peptides were reported to have multifunctional activities. Structurally Annotated Therapeutic Peptides database (SATPdb) is another unique database [41] in which peptides are structurally annotated based on experimental structures or computational structure prediction tools. Further, Table 1 lists databases with hemolytic [23], anticancer activities [38–40], blood–brain barrier [56], and membrane-permeable [61] properties. These peptide databases serve as a rich source of information for building reliable ML and DL models for predicting peptide activities and properties. However, the peptide sequences need to be converted into numerical vectors or matrices for developing such models. Comprehensive overview of publicly available peptide databases categorized by biological function, annotation scope, and curation status. The table summarizes major databases of antimicrobial, antiviral, antiparasitic, anticancer, therapeutic, food-derived, neuropeptide, hormonal, and other specialized peptides. For each resource, the number of entries corresponds to the number of unique peptide (or protein) sequences reported in the database publications or versioned updates. Annotation scope explains the primary data types provided (e.g. activity, structure, physicochemical properties, or clinical relevance). Databases that are continuously curated without discrete versioning are indicated accordingly. Detailed database descriptions and exact dataset sizes are provided for comparative reference. Illustration of the type, evolution, and data-driven methodological associations of peptide databases; (a) functional categorization of publicly available peptide databases based on biological application, including antimicrobial, antiviral and antiparasitic, anticancer and tumor-targeting, neuropeptide and specialized, food-derived bioactive, and therapeutic and multifunctional peptide resources; (b) temporal evolution of peptide database development (Table 1), illustrating the growth of peptide resources across distinct time periods and highlighting the phases of rapid expansion and consolidation; (c) association between major peptide database categories and commonly applied ML and RL model families, reflecting how different database types are typically analyzed depending on data scale, annotation depth, and application context. Quantitative Structure–Activity Relationship (QSAR) and Quantitative Structure-Property Relationship (QSPR) were among the earliest data-driven models that related chemical structures or peptide sequences to activities and properties. The models were developed using molecular descriptors (hydrophobicity, hydrophilicity, and sequence charges), which were mostly derived from experiments. Currently, various other molecular descriptors and fingerprints can be computed using empirical and quantum mechanics-based approaches, which can then be fed to ML and DL to construct reliable structure–activity and structure–property relationships. The non-linear relationship between molecular features and properties can be fully captured in these models. Given a task, the predictive models are trained to perform classification (function, activity, or toxicity prediction), regression (binding affinity or half-life), or unsupervised learning to identify patterns and similarity across sequences [14]. Clustering methods identify similar peptides, facilitating search across alternative biomolecular perturbations of the peptides [63]. In classical ML methods, support vector machines and random classifiers have been widely applied for peptide analytics and deal with the engineered feature representation for limited peptide data. Both have been used extensively to analyze peptide sequences and predict new, effective peptides [64]. Recently, deep neural networks have become central to modern ML and are statistical models with a very large breadth and depth of nodes in composition that concatenate non-linear functions together to form a very flexible model representation. With a high-capacity model, DL enables increasingly accurate fitting with an indefinite supply of training data [65]. Thus, in contexts with many potential training samples, DL offers significant advantages in prediction accuracy, at the expense of training cost and model interpretability. With databases containing millions of bioactive peptides, the requisite data for effective training can be available depending on the particular context [66]. Given the enormous design space of peptides, the choice of feature embedding is critical for achieving tractably efficient computation. The peptide prediction models rely on the accurate representation of peptide sequences as meaningful features or embeddings. Traditional development encodes peptide sequences using amino acid composition, dipeptide and tripeptide composition, physicochemical properties, and secondary structure, which are then used to develop predictive ML models. Tools such as Pfeature [67] enable large-scale extraction of sequence-derived and physicochemical features, facilitating the development of a wide range of predictive models. More recently, PLMs have proven to be powerful alternatives to sequence representations. These PLMs were trained on contextual embeddings and have learned the relationship between different amino acids in a given sequence of peptides and proteins, and can be used to convert these sequences into numerical vectors or matrices. Embeddings derived from models such as CPCProt [68], SeqVec [69], various ESM variants (ESM, ESM-1b [70,], and ESM-1v [71]), ProtT5-XL UniRef50, ProtT5-XL BFD [72,], and ProtBERT [73] including the latest ESM-2 [74] have been successfully applied across multiple peptide property prediction tasks. These representations enable transfer learning across peptide domains by reducing feature engineering, although their effectiveness can vary depending on the prediction task, dataset composition, and evaluation protocol. Despite advancements in methodologies, predictive performance remains strongly influenced by the quality, diversity, and consistency of annotations in available datasets. Straightforward comparisons between empirical studies are made more challenging by variations in feature representations, embedding strategies, and training data, which can substantially affect outcomes. These factors underscore the importance of standardized benchmarking and prompt a more rigorous discussion of the evaluation, reproducibility, availability, and limitations of data-driven peptide models. DL has also given rise to a new class of data-driven computation—generative models. These models learn an alternative or latent-space representation of the data, which is then used to sample from the population distribution, i.e. generate new data points that should resemble the ones it had trained on, as far as the most relevant qualities. This class of methods includes variational autoencoders (VAEs), generative adversarial networks (GANs), and diffusion models, and has been widely used for the generation of novel peptides focusing on specific objectives [75, 76]. These methods incorporate random noise to ensure that samples from the population distribution do not reproduce the training data. In the case of VAEs, the input data D is mapped to a latent space S, where noise is introduced, and a denoising model brings it back into the population’s space. With adversarial neural networks, a non-cooperative game is solved to promote robustness. Specifically, with w the weights and r the noise, and L(w,d) the loss, one solves min(w)max(r)[L(w,d + r)]. Finally, diffusion models add Gaussian noise to the data d until it resembles an isotropic Gaussian e, and learn the map between these two distributions. Then samples can be generated by sampling from e and diffusing back to a sample in the space of d. Thus, all of these methods enable one to sample from an easy-to-compute random normal distribution and, through a deep model trained on data, obtain a sample from a desired population distribution, such as protein sequences that yield bioactivity and binding properties. By providing training data from existing protein sequences, GenAI seeks to model the distribution of all protein sequences with these qualities, enabling one to sample from this distribution to obtain an entirely novel sequence that should have these properties [77]. Generative models have revolutionized peptide design by enabling de novo discovery of sequences with tailored biological functions. Unlike traditional sequence-based prediction models, generative frameworks can design peptides from scratch (de novo) by integrating factors such as structure, biological activity, and pharmacokinetics. The conventional methods include structure/knowledge-based design, peptidomimetics, and design based on known protein-protein interaction (PPI) motifs, which have been extensively used in peptide design by leveraging natural amino acids. Whereas the non-natural amino acids (NNAAs), in addition to the generative models, offer a convincing prospect to improve the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics properties of peptides in lead discovery [78]. The art of therapeutic peptide design warrants balancing of multifaceted issues, such as high antimicrobial or anticancer activity, proteolytic stability, solubility, and low toxicity [2, 3]. These factors, which work in either concordance or discordance, are difficult to complicate the overall peptide design [79]. GenAI models that employ multi-objective optimization (MOO) frameworks are less vulnerable compared to conventional predictive modeling approaches. Conditional VAEs and conditional generative diffusion models, when trained on curated datasets with conditioning and constraints, exhibit better predictive performance. GenAI models such as VAEs, transformers, and GANs typically produce candidate sequences, which are then evaluated by predictive models trained on curated datasets. To assess the generated peptides, the model employs multiple criteria, including toxicity, solubility, and other biomedical properties [80, 81]. Furthermore, multiple evaluation scores are then combined using multi-objective scoring functions, such as weighted scoring, Pareto front analysis, or Bayesian optimization, to balance scores across criteria. To address such cases, the generation process follows a closed-loop RL workflow, and the reward function derived from the scoring models directly monitors the generator’s learning dynamics [82]. Further sections discuss more details on this approach. The application of GenAI in peptide design relies on training a DL model and retrieving sequence patterns, as well as structural and functional properties, embedded in the known peptide data pool. The models basically focus on pretraining and fine-tuning. First, the model architecture is built for sequence generation using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTMs) due to their ability to capture temporal dependencies in biological sequences [83]. The peptide sequences are tokenized, and the models are trained using next-token prediction in an autoregressive manner until sequence completion (one residue at a time). Modern approaches employ transformer-based architectures (e.g. generative pre-trained transformer (GPT), bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT)) to better capture long-range dependencies and to enable efficient training on large sequence datasets. Transformer uses self-attention to model long-range dependencies to model within peptide sequences (Fig. 3). Pretrained language models are fine-tuned on peptide datasets with different biological annotations [74]. The structure-aware paradigm for AI-driven peptide design, which incorporates explicit 3D structural information to enable mechanistic evaluation of peptide target interactions; structure-based models operate on 3D representations such as atomic coordinates, graphs, or peptide-protein complexes, allowing the assessment of spatial complementarity and interaction geometry; candidate peptides are evaluated using physics-informed, structure-specific scoring functions, which provide higher mechanistic confidence than sequence-only or purely statistical approaches; this paradigm is typically applied at later stages of peptide discovery to refine and validate candidates prior to experimental testing. Several classes of GenAI models have been successfully applied in peptide design. Among them, VAEs have been widely utilized to embed peptide sequences into a continuous latent space, from which novel sequences can be decoded. Transformer-based architectures inspired by LLMs such as GPTs have demonstrated remarkable performance in peptide and protein sequence generation due to their ability to capture long-range dependencies through self-attention mechanisms [65]. RL is increasingly popular for optimizing peptide sequences, where design is framed as a sequential decision-making process guided by biologically relevant rewards. Multiple works have demonstrated how RL enhances peptide property optimization and enables de novo generation under multi-constraint scenarios. RL is a ML problem of finding the best policy of actions in a random environment of evolution between states. RL includes a set of actions, a set of states, a transition function to be learned, and a reward function to be learned. Over a sequence of time steps, the agent performs actions to simultaneously maximize rewards and learn the system. It must be remarked that while there is clear potential for RL in facilitating optimal decision making, an important component of deep reinforcement learning training on game play was the fact that a limitless number of simulations can be performed of the game play at minimal cost, and nothing is required beyond computation [84]. This means that the training sample can be arbitrarily large, thus yielding neural networks’ universal approximation guarantees. By contrast, one has to be careful when considering cases in which training samples can only be obtained, e.g. via a wet-lab experiment, and when no database with millions of historical data points is available. When data are sparse, RL is known to have difficulty converging and is also likely to overtrain (Fig. 4). Schematic representation of an RL framework for de novo peptide optimization; an initial seed peptide (Phase 1) passes in a closed-loop optimization cycle in which a mutation engine defines the action space through amino-acid substitutions, insertions, and deletions (Phase 2); a DL-based policy network (Phase 3) samples mutation actions from a state-dependent policy π(a∣s), which the environment then applies to generate new peptide states; the resulting peptides are evaluated using a multi-objective reward model (Phase 4) that integrates efficacy-, safety-, and stability-related scoring functions into a scalar reward used to update the policy; the optimization loop continues until policy convergence is achieved, indicated by reward plateauing and stable policy updates, after which optimized peptide candidates are obtained for downstream structural modeling and experimental validation (Phase 5). RL models for peptide design consider sequential decisions in which an “agent” (algorithm) learns to select an amino acid modification or sequence alteration in an “environment” (the peptide design space) to maximize a “reward” signal. This reward is directly tied to the desired properties of the peptides, such as binding affinity, toxicity, and cell permeability. The iterative nature of RL makes it exceptionally well-suited for MOO, where several often-conflicting properties need to be balanced. For instance, an RL pipeline might involve generating an initial peptide sequence, predicting its activity using a pretrained classifier, calculating a reward score based on that prediction, and then adjusting the generator’s parameters to improve future outputs (see Fig. 4) By an iterative process based on feedback from the reward signal, the model generates peptide sequence, offering an efficient and scalable approach to multi-objective peptide optimization. Rapid emergence of the ML, generative models, and RL has aided progress across peptide design tasks, from AMP classification to de novo generation of peptide binders. Evaluation of the model performance is a crucial phase that poses a challenge due to its highly diverse nature and ineffective standardization protocols. In this context, metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, root mean square error (RMSE), and novelty are widely used to quantify model performance across classification, regression, and generative tasks. However, their interpretation in peptide therapeutics is non-trivial and strongly dependent on dataset composition and validation strategy. As a result, some general performance metrics may overestimate generalization ability and be affected by underlying limitations related to dataset bias, surrogate evaluation, and experimental errors and uncertainty. The F1-score, which balances precision and recall, is particularly important in imbalanced datasets common in peptide discovery: where Precision = \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} $\frac{{TP}}{{TP}+{FP}}$\end{document} is the proportion of predicted positives that are true positives, and Recall = \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} $\frac{{TP}}{{TP}+{FN}}$\end{document} is the proportion of true positive identified correctly (TP = true positives, FP = false positives, FN = false negatives). Similarly, for peptide activity prediction or binding affinity regression tasks, metrics such as RMSE and R-squared (R2) are essential. RMSE provides an absolute measure of prediction error: where yi = experimental value, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} ${\hat{{y}}}_{{i}}$\end{document} = the predicted value, and n = number of samples. And the R2 metric indicates the proportion of variance explained by the model: where \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} $\underset{\_}{{y}}$\end{document} is the mean of experimental values. Generative peptide design frameworks, including GANs, diffusion models, VAEs, and LLMs, are evaluated using the known metrics such as validity, novelty, diversity, and uniqueness. These metrics aim to predict whether a model generates synthetically valid peptides by exploring the full sequence space, thereby enabling the successful detection of overfitting; however, they are insufficient for assessing biological and therapeutic relevance. To achieve the sequence-based novelty, minor residue substitutions will have little functional impact [85]. Whereas high diversity may hinder the structural and physicochemical restraints necessary for peptide activity. Many effective peptides share common functional patterns, so they may not appear “novel” to sequence-based metrics; therefore, a model trained to maximize novelty may avoid producing peptides that are actually biologically relevant [65, 75]. Novelty is defined as the proportion of generated peptides that do not overlap with the training set: Whereas Diversity helps by quantifying sequence dissimilarity across the generated peptides set, as the model could generate a large number of highly similar peptides. where N = number of generated peptides, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} ${{s}}_{{i}},{{s}}_{{j}}$\end{document} are the peptide sequences, and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal} \usepackage{amsmath} \usepackage{wasysym} \usepackage{amsfonts} \usepackage{amssymb} \usepackage{amsbsy} \usepackage{upgreek} \usepackage{mathrsfs} \setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt} \begin{document} ${d}\left({{s}}_{{i}},{{s}}_{{j}}\right)$\end{document} are the distance metrics. AMPs have attracted renewed attention, especially amid the frequent occurrence of infectious diseases and the rise of multidrug-resistant pathogens [86]. A notable recent breakthrough is mammuthusin, a woolly mammoth DNA-derived AMP that explains how DL models can exploit evolutionary diversity beyond contemporary peptide databases. A DL model for predicting antimicrobial activity was used to screen ~10 M peptide sequences from 12 860 protein sequences of 208 extinct species, which resulted in ~37 176 AMPs. Among these, mammuthin has demonstrated potent activity against resistant strains such as Klebsiella pneumoniae in preclinical mouse models, highlighting the untapped potential of combining paleogenomics with AI-guided peptide discovery [87]. In this study, a DL model for predicting antimicrobial properties was developed using physicochemical properties, including amphiphilicity and hydrophobicity. OmegAMP is another model developed for classification and AMP generation. The classifier was developed using sequences derived physicochemical properties where AMPs were used as positives, while metabolic and synthetic peptides served as negatives. The generator is a diffusion model-based, which is guided by the classifier. Twenty-four out of 25 generated peptides were shown to contain AMP in wet-lab experiments, demonstrating the high success rate of peptide generators implemented in OmegAMP [88]. Another key example of rapid AI-discovery is AMP, designed by Wang et al., which relies on PLM-based embeddings to generate AMPs with activity against Gram-negative bacteria. The breakthrough discovery occurred over a remarkable 11-day period [89]. While high in vitro success rates were reported, such results were expected to be interpreted in the context of dataset composition, validation scope, and the absence of large-scale potential testing. Together, this application domain showcases the success of AI-driven peptide design in improving the chemical space efficiently, but at the same time, the practical impact remains limited by data quality, evaluation practices, and the limited space for experimental validation. Based on in vitro validation, a 94% success rate was reported. Furthermore, several of these peptides demonstrated therapeutic efficacy in murine lung infection experiments. The entire process, from design to validation, concluded in 48 days [89]. In oncology, peptides are being developed to target tumor antigens precisely, disrupt intracellular signaling pathways, or serve as effective carriers for cytotoxic payloads. Notably, conotoxin analogs with estimated in vitro affinities for α7 and α4β2 nAChRs receptors were effectively generated by the diffusion-based deep generative framework, CreoPep [90], highlighting the feasibility of structure-informed peptide design. Another critical domain is drug delivery, where cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) are utilized to transport therapeutic molecules across biological barriers. Recent advances have focussed on tumor-microenvironment-responsive CPPs and protease-activated delivery systems, enabling higher target specificity and reduced systemic toxicity [91]. AI-assisted CPP design is rapidly gaining attraction, with algorithms optimizing charge distribution, helicity, and endosomal escape potential [17]. Nevertheless, CPP datasets are often characterized by heterogeneous annotation criteria and scarcity of experimentally validated non-penetrating peptides, which restricts the transferability of models across different delivery contexts and biological barriers. A comprehensive review of computational strategies was explored by Sun et al. [92] to target traditionally undruggable proteins, those lacking well-defined ligand-binding pockets, possessing high conformational flexibility, or participating in complex PPIs. The authors systematically dissect four major classes of such targets: intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs), allosteric regulatory sites, PPIs interface, and proteins targeted for degradation (e.g. via PROTACs). Central to their discussion is the transformative role of AI, particularly DL and generative models, in redefining the boundaries of druggable space. Thus, to this extent, peptides have shown to be promising candidates in engaging extended surfaces and dynamic conformations that were inaccessible to small molecules [93]. Current breakthroughs in AI and ML have expanded the peptide therapeutics design space by enabling targeting undruggable proteins. Generative models and representation-learning approaches enable exploration of sequence space beyond known binding motifs, while structure-aware frameworks integrate docking, graph-based representations to account for 3D interactions. In the design of peptide inhibitors of PPIs, modulators of allosteric sites, and components of targeted degradation systems such as PROTACs, AI-driven methods have been extensively used. AI-DPAPT is a ML model developed for predicting the activity of PROTACS and it uses the Morgan molecular fingerprint for developing this model. [94] A more robust model for PROTACS design is PROTAC-RL, which is a deep generative model based on an augmented transformer architecture and RL. The generative model used various PROTACS, like chemical space, for training and actual PROTACS for fine-tuning [95]. The model generates PROTACS for a specific target given the E3 ligase and warhead pair. The model generated ~5000 PROTACS for bromodomain-containing protein 4 (BRP4). Based on their synthesizability, six were synthesized, and three showed inhibitory effects against BRP4. These approaches validate the potential of data-driven models to identify candidate peptides that engage in the complex or temporary interfaces. However, many reported successes rely heavily on in silico surrogate evaluations, such as docking scores or MD-derived stability metrics. While these proxies enable rapid screening, their correlation with experimental binding affinity and functional outcomes remains variable, particularly for highly flexible targets. ProGen [96], PepFormer [9, 7], and Peptide-GPT [98] utilize attention mechanisms to capture long-range dependencies and biologically relevant motifs within peptide sequences. Unlike earlier sequence models, transformers offer prompt-based generation, allowing users to provide textual or token-based prompts, such as “antimicrobial, cationic, 12-mer,” to direct the model's output toward specific design goals. PepGPT, a transformer model fine-tuned on labeled therapeutic peptides, demonstrated strong generalization across multiple peptide classes and conditions, enabling rapid prototyping of candidates with desired activity and physicochemical characteristics. It employs another breakthrough that integrates structural constraints directly into generative pipelines. A hybrid approach combining LLMs with graph neural networks or 3D embeddings is being developed to generate peptides with desirable sequences and favorable structural profiles. In addition, few-shot learning and meta-learning techniques have emerged as powerful solutions for peptide design under limited data conditions. More recently, diffusion models have gained attention for their ability to generate high-fidelity molecular sequences by iteratively refining random noise into coherent structures. These models, as employed in RosettaFold diffusion [99], enable fine-grained control over the structural and functional attributes of generated peptides, offering a new frontier in precision peptide engineering. PepINVENT is developed to go beyond the simplistic amino acid sequence space and propose peptides, aided by an RL-based generative framework, with improved drug-like properties [78]. This platform uses both natural and NNAA sequences which opens the synthetic peptide and peptidomimetics space for the therapeutic peptide design. It is built upon the REINVENT platform [100], a known SMILES-based molecular generator, and repurposed to handle peptide-specific syntax. Diffusion-based generative models, inspired by recent breakthroughs in image synthesis (e.g. DALL·E 2), have been repurposed for peptide design. These models work by transforming random noise into structured peptide sequences, guided by learned probabilistic trajectories. Batra et al. [101] reported an efficient use of a ML-driven approach to design self-assembling peptides, which is expected to overcome the human bias. The study reports an AI-expert model, which is a fully autonomous peptide discovery platform combining Monte Carlo Tree Search, random forest models, and MD simulations to efficiently explore vast peptide sequence spaces. The model was effective when applied to tri- and pentapeptides, with computational costs that were only a fraction of those required by brute-force modeling and simulation techniques. Thus, AI-guided peptide design not only accelerates discovery but also expands the accessible sequence landscape by integrating GenAI and RL in functional peptide design. RL is highlighted as a promising strategy for MOO in lead discovery, especially for dynamic targets such as IDPs or transient PPIs. The successful advancement of peptide-based candidates, including Omomyc and EPI-7386, serves as evidence that drugging IDPs is now entering a clinically actionable era [102, 103]. Furthermore, the article underscores the synergy between experimental validation and AI-driven design, forecasting a future where GenAI and RL will play a pivotal role in addressing targets once deemed “undruggable.” Generative models using sequence-oriented RNNs, LSTMs, and transformer architectures are widely applied to generate novel peptide sequences from scratch. These peptides are trained on large datasets to learn sequence distribution patterns and structural motifs. PepGAN [104] employs a GAN to generate AMPs by learning from real peptide distributions. ProT-Diff [105] is a modular pipeline combining a pretrained ProtT5-XL encoder and decoder with a diffusion model trained on latent peptide embeddings. By leveraging PLM embeddings and diffusion sampling, ProT-Diff can efficiently generate novel AMPs with minimal training data and graphics processing unit (GPU) resources. Property optimization via conditional generation: The recent development in peptide generation is also to guide the model to produce peptides with predefined properties such as high solubility, low toxicity, or strong binding affinity. Conditional VAEs and prompt-based transformers are commonly used for this purpose. AMPGAN v2 [106] uses a conditional GAN to generate peptides based on conditional variables such as antiviral activity and peptide structure. TransformerBeta [107] addresses the design of linear peptide binders targeting specific epitopes, treating peptide design as a parallel to language translation. It uses AlphaFold-predicted [108] structures to construct large beta-sheet datasets and then trains a transformer model to generate sequences with interpretable physicochemical motifs. Reinforcement learning for functional fine-tuning: RL allows fine-tuning generative models by defining reward functions based on desired biochemical properties. This approach is practical when the target property is poorly represented in the training data or difficult to learn with supervised methods. PepFormer [97] fine-tunes a peptide-generating transformer using RL to maximize antimicrobial prediction scores. HELM-GPT (hierarchical editing language for macromolecules) employs GPT-style generation over HELM-encoded macrocyclic sequences. Its pipeline uses contrastive preference learning alongside RL to iteratively optimize cell permeability and Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS)-binding affinity, demonstrating superior optimization under predefined monomer constraints. Target-specific and structure-aware peptide design: Recent applications combine GenAI or RL with structural modeling, docking, and MD to guide the generation process. These approaches facilitate the design of peptides targeting specific receptors, such as major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC-I) epitopes, viral spike proteins, or cancer biomarkers. PepMLM [109] leverages masked language modeling with structural embeddings to generate peptides that bind cancer-associated proteins. AlphaDesign [110] combines AlphaFold2 [111] predictions with generative and evolutionary strategies to design peptides with predefined folds and functions. Hybrid and feedback-driven approaches: In advanced workflows, generative models are coupled with predictive scoring functions or simulation-based feedback (e.g. docking scores or MD stability metrics). This hybrid approach enhances functional optimization during generation. PepFlow [112] integrates a generative transformer with feedback loops from MD simulations to design stable helical peptides for therapeutic applications. RL-CPP uses an RL agent to design CPPs using property predictors as the reward function. As of 2025, GenAI and RL techniques continue to evolve in peptide science, with new models incorporating MOO, uncertainty quantification, and structure-aware embeddings. Table 2 summarizes the comprehensive list of computational models developed for peptide design. Summary of key computational models for peptide design using AI and GenAI developed through July 2025. Each entry includes the model’s name, year of release, model type (e.g. generative, predictive), underlying architecture (e.g. transformer, GAN, VAE, diffusion, flow models), core methodology, primary applications (e.g. AMPs, cyclic peptides, structure-based design), availability of code or web tool, and relevant publication references. The rapid increase in peptide-based drug design encompasses diverse modeling paradigms, including classifier-based, structure-aware, and generative frameworks, which are collectively referred to as “AI-enabled peptide design.” However, primarily, they differ in data type selection, objectives, and evaluation methods. Generative modeling approaches aim to explore peptide sequence space beyond known examples by leveraging datasets of known sequences to propose novel candidate sequences. Table 3 summarizes the recent generative models, structure-based modeling, predictive modeling, and classifier-based learning methods, along with their performance. Representative AI-based peptide design models (2022–25) organized by modeling paradigm and evaluation strategy. The table provides a paradigm-level comparative perspective, using representative recent studies as illustrative examples to examine the reshaping of peptide design through various modeling studies. While examining the efficiency of generative approaches, it also explores the sequence and biological constraint space, reporting the effectiveness, limitations, and usefulness of hybrid pipelines that incorporate multiple paradigms. As shown in Table 3, recent generative frameworks, such as diffusion-based models and language models, primarily operate on sequences, making them well-suited for early-stage discovery and hypothesis generation. Structure-based modeling paradigms that incorporate 3D information about peptides and their targets to provide a mechanistic basis in the design and evaluation of the peptides. The structure-aware design spans from peptide–protein complexes to a predictive framework, leveraging docking, interaction features, and structure-derived descriptors to identify candidate peptides. Obviously, these methods offer improved interpretability compared to sequence-only methods; their effectiveness strongly depends on model quality and is limited by computational cost and the ability to model flexible peptides. Classifier-based and representation-learning methods focus on predicting peptide properties or learning transferable embeddings rather than generating sequences directly. As presented in Table 3, these models operate on peptide sequences and are trained using known labels, learning by comparing peptides. These models were built to perform tasks such as activity classification, toxicity prediction, and PPI scoring, and were strengthened in scalability and efficiency, making them stand out for high-throughput screening and prioritization of peptide candidates. As these types of models depend on labeled data, which makes them sensitive to dataset bias, they limit their capacity to identify truly novel peptide candidates. The above-described models explain the increasing adoption of hybrid workflows in which generative models enable exploration of peptide sequences, classifier-based predictors perform rapid prioritization, and structure-aware methods refine the best candidates prior to experimental testing. It is worth noting that the integrated pipelines balance exploration, reliability, and feasibility more effectively than any single paradigm, underscoring the importance of aligning modeling strategies and biological goals with specific design objectives rather than seeking a universally optimal approach. Most models primarily use validity, novelty, and diversity metrics and occasionally employ surrogate predictors of activity and stability. However, GenAI methods that rely on the sequence-only representations make these models susceptible to hallucination and misalignment, especially when the data are scarce. A universal challenge in AI-driven peptide design is the scarcity of data and the presence of heterogeneous conditions and annotations across datasets. As shown in Table 1, for categories such as antiviral, BBB permeable, quorum quenching, and anti-angiogenic, there are very limited numbers of peptides (a few hundred to thousands) available, while the actual peptide space is astronomical. Another challenge in predictive AI model development is the non-availability of “negatives” datasets, and many times random peptides are used for this class, which will affect the accuracy of the models. Due to data scarcity, model training increases variance in evaluation metrics and sensitivity to dataset bias and noise. Different studies employ various strategies for dataset selection, sequence redundancy threshold, training-set splitting, and other factors to achieve successful prediction. Robust benchmarking in peptide design will require standardized datasets, transparent reporting of data preprocessing and evaluation protocols, and broader adoption of reproducible pipelines. Until such standards are established, comparative analyses should emphasize qualitative trends, shared challenges, and failure modes rather than absolute performance rankings. Overall, this consideration suggests that the evaluation metrics are insufficient for evaluating AI-driven peptide design. The rapid integration of AI into the peptide space has raised new challenges in openness, traceability, and algorithmic bias. Many of the developed models rely on limited datasets with biases and redundancy; as a result, performance was reported using non-standard metrics, or, in many cases, it depends on surrogate in silico evaluations without any correlation with experimental outcomes. Furthermore, data scarcity, a lack of experimental validation, and inconsistent benchmarking studies complicated cross-study comparisons and the assessment of real-world impact. As a result, the developed models must be reported with caution when claims of diversity, novelty, and biological activity are made without sufficient supporting information. The models developed mostly rely on the training datasets and their statistical correlations rather than focusing on the property space, resulting in mapping the peptide efficacy [13]. A key limitation of the generative peptide design, precisely in the LLMs, is hallucination—the generation of peptides that are statistically correct yet violate structural, biophysical, or synthetic constraints. One of the major reasons is the scarcity of data (small, biased, and incomplete), as well as the lack of sufficient information on 3D structure, folding energetics, synthesis rules, and wet-lab feedback. GenAI and RL approaches for peptide design primarily rely on surrogate evaluation models, such as predictive classifiers and structure-based scoring functions, for sequence generation and optimization. Although these surrogates provide rapid in silico screening, they can be biased and weakly correlated with biological functions, leading to reward hacking and over-optimization. In RL frameworks, sparse and noisy feedback further approximate reward signals, increasing the risk of premature convergence and poor generalization in experiments [82, 84]. Data-leakage is another key aspect which results in superiorly performing models which will yield poor results for unseen sequences in real scenarios. The sequences having larger similarity present in training and test datasets (differing in terms of a few residues) will lead to data-leakage-related issues, and prior to model development, the sequence similarity analyses need to be carried out, and data splitting for training and testing needs to be carefully planned. In a recent work [144], a homology-based partitioning has been adopted to split the training and testing datasets which helps in improving the model performance and generalization. The data-leakage aspect has also been recently addressed for organics chemical space [145] with respect to binding pose prediction. Peptide-based therapeutics have emerged as the most important class of molecules in neurodegenerative, cancer, metabolic and cardiovascular conditions, infectious diseases, and other challenging diseases. Conventional approaches encounter severe challenges in the peptide design, optimization, and eventually develop into a therapeutic agent. The recent advent of new generation AI tools has completely transformed the ability to encounter lead optimization and molecule design problems. While the current review focuses on ML, GenAI and RL techniques, the ability of agentic AI, new foundation models, multimodal learning, self-supervised pretraining, and AI frameworks provide opportunities in a completely new dimension. The promise of AI-driven peptide design is very high owing to the effective application of GenAI, agentic, and other emerging technologies which are effectively integrating with the experimental data, besides that emanates from the conventional computational approaches. Despite these advancements, there are some challenges, and one of the primary bottlenecks is the synthetic feasibility of many AI-generated sequences and their economic feasibility. Another significant barrier is the challenges encountered in the internal and external validation of the model, as well as its interpretability, which remains challenging. Generative models, specifically transformers and diffusion models are not categorized as rational methods and are often treated as black boxes, providing limited insights about why a specific sequence was selected. However, one of the major advantages is the novelty that the GenAI methods bring due to their unique ability in generating diverse novel peptide sequences through the distributions of amino acid patterns and capturing biological priors embedded in the training data. In contrast, RL adopts goal-directed generation of novel peptide molecules by incorporating a reward mechanism that optimizes specific peptide physicochemical, biological, or therapeutic properties. Thus, supervised or unsupervised learning approaches employed in GenAI RL introduce an agent environment. This allows models to fine-tune the properties of the peptide candidates toward and elegantly guide them to achieve specific and better functional outcomes beyond the data-derived patterns. A major factor to consider is that RL-based models require efficient reward functions, which can be difficult to craft accurately for biological systems. On the other hand, GenAI is limited by the quality and representativeness of the training data and may show inadequacies in functional targeting, especially when the dataset is limited, coupled with the lack of integration between conditioning strategies and filtering steps. Therefore, ideally, a diligent combination of the hybrid approaches that combine GenAI for diversity generation and RL for property optimization appears to be the most effective. The study presents a critical exposition of the challenges involved in the peptide therapeutic design and highlights the necessity of using the emerging data-driven approaches. The recent works based on the structure- and classifier-based modeling approaches were compared and contrasted with those of generative artificial intelligence (AI). The current review provides the first comprehensive account of the contemporary literature in the field of peptide design, by highlighting the role of emerging AI technologies. Salient aspects such as data scarcity, data leakage, validation, limitation, and the generalizability of models are discussed. The study presents a critical exposition of the challenges involved in the peptide therapeutic design and highlights the necessity of using the emerging data-driven approaches. The recent works based on the structure- and classifier-based modeling approaches were compared and contrasted with those of generative artificial intelligence (AI). The current review provides the first comprehensive account of the contemporary literature in the field of peptide design, by highlighting the role of emerging AI technologies. Salient aspects such as data scarcity, data leakage, validation, limitation, and the generalizability of models are discussed. Lipsa Priyadarsinee, Conceptualization (lead), Literature search (lead), Writing original draft (lead), Natarajan Arul Murugan, Conceptualization (lead), Literature search (lead), Writing original draft (lead), Vyacheslav Kungurtsev, Conceptualization (lead), Writing original draft (lead), Vibhor Kumar, reviewing original draft (supporting), Garikapati Narahari Sastry, writing original draft (supporting), Bapi Chatterjee, reviewing original draft (supporting) All authors, Review & editing (lead), Final approval (lead) None declared. Vyacheslav Kungurtsev and Arul Murugan acknowledge Czech National Science Foundation under Project 24-11664S for the support of the work. Arul Murugan and Vibhor Kumar support DBT-Vinnova funded Indo-Swedish project entitled “AI-based bio-design for developing peptide therapeutics against pneumonia-causing pathogens with experimental validation”. All data referenced are publicly available in the cited literature.